[Amit Varma]: Lines on a map often seem to carry such certainty. On one side of a line, we are told, is one
[Amit Varma]: country. On the other side is another. Border controls and armies exist to stop any bleeding
[Amit Varma]: from one side to the other. The lines are sacred. And yet, people are fluid. I may belong
[Amit Varma]: as much to one place as to another. People from another land may sing my songs and eat
[Amit Varma]: my food, even if they don't share my national anthem. Those in my own land, when we trace
[Amit Varma]: our past, we find a dozen no lines on a map. If you think of the world in terms of nation
[Amit Varma]: states, India and Pakistan are two distinct entities. If you think of the world in terms
[Amit Varma]: of cultures and people and languages and food and clothes and the affectionate terms that
[Amit Varma]: grandmothers have for their little babies, those borders don't matter. Take Sindhis,
[Amit Varma]: for example. They've been around from before nation states, and who knows, they might outlive
[Amit Varma]: this possibly transitory concept. You can plant a flag on a hilltop, but you cannot
[Amit Varma]: divide a river quite so easily.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is a splendidly spirited Saaz Agarwal,
[Amit Varma]: an artist, a writer, a publisher, and to many, the keeper of the Sindhi flame. Born Saaz
[Amit Varma]: Bijlani, she did a master's in mathematics, became a journalist and a writer, and then
[Amit Varma]: wrote a series of books about the past and present of Sindh. We got together a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: ago for this episode and discussed her own rich life, the history and culture of Sindh,
[Amit Varma]: and themes such as memory, identity, assimilation, loss, rootedness. Even if you're not Sindhi,
[Amit Varma]: you'll find this a fascinating conversation. But before we get to it, let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST, or
[Amit Varma]: about $150, and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiauncut.com slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Guest]: Saaz welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you. Thank you so much, Amit. It's lovely to be here.
[Amit Varma]: We've known each other for must be a decade and a half though I kind of forget how we
[Amit Varma]: met.
[Guest]: Um, it was probably something to do with writing your book. You know, I seem to remember being
[Amit Varma]: part of a book launch that you did in Pune.
[Amit Varma]: That must be 2009. A really long time ago. Yeah, and I would of course have been familiar
[Amit Varma]: with your byline and your work well before that, because you've been writing columns
[Amit Varma]: and so on for so many years. So tell me a little bit more about you. Like one of the
[Amit Varma]: things I've realized when I've spoken with people on the show who have been friends who
[Amit Varma]: I've known for a long, long time, is actually I realized while recording with them that
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know them at all. Because when you're just friends, and when you're hanging out,
[Amit Varma]: there's a lot of stuff you don't talk about and that you don't ask each other. And that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, can make you look at them in a different way. So let's go right back to your sort of
[Amit Varma]: to your childhood, you know, where were you born?
[Guest]: I was actually born in Bombay, but was probably was here only very, very briefly, maybe two
[Guest]: weeks or something. My father was a tea planter in the Nilgiris. And I was my parents first
[Guest]: child. So my mother came to have me in Bombay. And it's funny, because less than two years
[Guest]: later, when she had her next baby, which was my brother, she just decided not to come to
[Guest]: Bombay and she had the baby at home in the guest bedroom of the manager's bungalow on
[Guest]: High Forest Estate. And that was quite a brave thing for her to do. But yeah, so I grew up
[Guest]: on the tea plantations, and went to boarding school when I was five, because it was, you
[Guest]: know, when you live in a place like that, that's, that's what there's no schools within
[Guest]: walking distance. And, yeah, actually, that was very defining. For me, because of years
[Guest]: between when I was five and seven, I was in a boarding school and was not a very pleasant
[Guest]: experience. It's, it was quite a hostile environment. And I was very unhappy. And my parents took
[Guest]: me out from there. And my dad got a transfer to a place where we could then commute to
[Guest]: school in Ooty, which was an hour's journey from the estate that he joined.
[Amit Varma]: So what what kind of kid were you? And, you know, what was it like, you know, those early
[Amit Varma]: years where, you know, you didn't grow up in a big city with things all around you and,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: Yeah, so we would visit Bombay once a year, where my grandparents lived, and we'd spend,
[Guest]: you know, about three, four weeks with them every year in the summer, in I'm sorry, in
[Guest]: the in December, when the schools in those days had a long break. And it was very cold,
[Guest]: we lived extremely cold. So it was nice to get away from that. And it was lovely being
[Guest]: in Bombay in those days, they lived in Colaba. So in those days, Khafre had not even come
[Guest]: up yet, it was just rubble and we'd walk by the on the promenade. And so those are the
[Guest]: memories I have of Bombay. But on the estates, life is very lonely, you know, you live you
[Guest]: and there's nobody except you and your family. And we live this very, I mean, you know, when
[Guest]: I think back, it's a little bit embarrassing to say this, but it was a very opulent life
[Guest]: style. So we were not wealthy, you know, but we lived a really lavish lifestyle. First
[Guest]: of all, the nature aspect where it's so beautiful, everywhere you look, acres and acres of green,
[Guest]: you know, the tea bushes, blue sky, and nobody, nothing. At night, you see the whole Milky
[Guest]: Way, it was just so beautiful. That was one. And the second is the the luxurious home,
[Guest]: you know, huge rooms, huge, like large houses, big gardens with lawns in front and flowers,
[Guest]: vegetable gardens, and no housework at all, because there was a huge staff to take care
[Guest]: of everything. And my mother was famous with her brothers for being for doing all her cooking
[Guest]: by just pressing a bell. Yeah, so, but it was extremely lonely. And I think when I was
[Guest]: young, so I changed my boarding school, those two years completely changed me, they kind
[Guest]: of traumatized me and made me a different person. It took me many, many years to come
[Guest]: back. I don't think I ever came back to what I was when I was young, which was very lively.
[Guest]: And I've been told by people who knew me then that I was quite boisterous and, you know,
[Guest]: always wanted my own way and things like that, which I actually don't think that's the kind
[Guest]: of person I turned into. But yeah, those two years were very difficult. And like, you know,
[Guest]: they kind of marked me, I was always with depression and, you know, not quite, not all
[Guest]: there. Until I mean, I slept with the light on, I couldn't sleep, I had night fears, and
[Guest]: I slept with the light on until I was about 25 years old, or maybe, yeah, when I had a
[Guest]: baby. And then, you know, I kind of became a little more stable. So but but then again,
[Guest]: now when I saw, you know, I had those first two years, which were, you know, it was like
[Guest]: being in an institution, I mean, you know, like totally uncared for and living in a place
[Guest]: where people don't really want you and going home during the holidays, and then screaming
[Guest]: and yelling and having to be peeled off my mother when I was being put back into school.
[Guest]: After that, for two years, my brother and I were day scholars commuting to a school
[Guest]: in Ooty. And then after that, we went to the proper, you know, the boarding school that
[Guest]: I spent the rest of our schooling in, which there as well, I wasn't that well adjusted.
[Guest]: But I think that I'm so I'm so lucky to have been to school like that, because the quality
[Guest]: of education was so good. And we had really good teachers, we had no pressure of academics
[Guest]: at all, you know, it was entirely about being a well rounded person learning many different
[Guest]: things, understanding the world, setting standards for yourself. And of course, some of those
[Guest]: things came from my parents as well, because they were those kind of that kind of people.
[Guest]: And that's probably why they wanted us to go to that kind of school. And the other thing
[Guest]: is also such a big network, because, you know, for us, my brother and me, at least for me,
[Guest]: in particular, we don't really have like, those, you know, bonds with cousins. And I
[Guest]: mean, the bonds with our school friends are very, very strong. So we, it's like my community.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that I often wonder about when it comes to people who have sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: grown up in either smaller towns, or in earlier times, where both of which are true of you,
[Amit Varma]: and to some extent of me, is that the rhythm of life is very different. The rhythm is really
[Amit Varma]: slow, like, you know, for you to grow up where you did, you know, would be so different from
[Amit Varma]: if you were a young person today in Bombay, where everything can be much more frenetic
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the things you do. And I don't just mean the difference you'd have between
[Amit Varma]: cities, but also the difference that has been created by technology today, like a young
[Amit Varma]: person today growing up, you'd always have a smartphone with you, you'd have a million
[Amit Varma]: things to do in there, you can check Instagram, you can go down YouTube rabbit holes, get
[Amit Varma]: addicted to Twitter, all of that, the rhythm is fully different. Do you feel that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, growing up, as you did, perhaps away from the big hectic cities, got you sort of
[Amit Varma]: used to a slower kind of rhythm, which might be something that is useful to you today itself
[Amit Varma]: or is part of your life today as well?
[Guest]: That's such a lovely question. I know that when we were young, it was indeed a very much
[Guest]: slower, relaxed life. I mean, days would pass just doing the same thing. And, you know,
[Guest]: just relaxing, reading, drinking tea, going for walks, you know. I don't live that kind
[Guest]: of life at all now. I haven't lived that kind of life for a really long time because I am
[Guest]: always doing something and always making something, always working on something. I don't know
[Guest]: what it is that it may seem like I'm ambitious, but honestly, I like doing things. And it's
[Guest]: not that I all I want. Yeah, I want to I want to do things and complete them and hang them
[Guest]: on the wall. But it's not that important for me to have them seen by everybody. You know,
[Guest]: for me, that making the thing is really important. Like, you know, apart from writing books,
[Guest]: I do I make crochet blankets, you know, and things like that. So about the pace of life,
[Guest]: I think when I came to Bombay to study in college, although I had I was familiar with
[Guest]: Bombay wasn't totally unfamiliar. It was still a huge culture shock because in those days,
[Guest]: this was in the late 1970s. There was no green in Bombay at all. There was no green. I mean,
[Guest]: the greening of Bombay started around then, late 70s, early 80s, I think. There were no
[Guest]: trees, there was nothing, you know. And so that time, I was just too dazed to realize
[Guest]: that this was missing. What did impact me was the crowd and the noise and the fact that
[Guest]: nobody had any manners, you know, because that we were not used to. So, you know, you
[Guest]: get into the bus and it's like, hey, pude chala, pude chala. So that took a bit of time
[Guest]: getting used to. But then after a few years, it was my my world. And I just remember this
[Guest]: funny thing when I talk about the bus. I remember getting into very crowded buses and pushing
[Guest]: my way in and stuff and looking at the front of the bus and thinking, oh, I would like
[Guest]: to get in from there. And I remember this because they had a sign up saying you can
[Guest]: enter the bus if you're old or if you're disabled or if you're pregnant. So I do remember this
[Guest]: when I was pregnant. I only did it once, but, you know, the bus was crowded. So I walked
[Guest]: out to the front and I must have run around to the front and hopped in. And the driver
[Guest]: was like, what's up? What happened to you? So I was like, I'm pregnant. You know, I don't
[Guest]: think I knew how to say mein pet se hoon. I must have just like, I don't know. I wasn't
[Guest]: showing, you know, so I may have pointed at my belly. I don't know what to say. Okay,
[Guest]: fine. Raised his eyebrows and let me in. And then somebody else came running up behind
[Guest]: me. And he's like, abhi tumko kya ho gaya? So it was like, so funny. Everything is, you
[Guest]: know, so ludicrous. Comparison. And that's one of the things that really I carry with
[Guest]: me everywhere that, you know, you, we take ourselves so seriously. You know, when you
[Guest]: sit in an AC room and you're, you know, whatever you do, you think that's the real life. But
[Guest]: actually, real life is out there, you know, when the bus driver says, abhi tumko kya ho
[Amit Varma]: gaya?
[Guest]: What was the reply he got?
[Guest]: I was just so embarrassed. I just slunk in and sat down. No, he asked the other guy behind
[Unknown]: me.
[Unknown]: So what did that guy say?
[Guest]: I don't remember. And he probably didn't know. I mean, he's a matadi guy from Mablesh or
[Guest]: whatever. And he probably just got off the bus.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting, you should say that Bombay wasn't green at all in those days, because
[Amit Varma]: the impression that like one stereotype of cities is that cities were fine until people
[Amit Varma]: came and then they messed it up and they became concrete jungles and all of that. But the
[Amit Varma]: thing is, they can be a movement in this other direction. Like I really love cities, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think that one, of course, there is a fact that they, you know, you get dense
[Amit Varma]: networks of people. So just as a greater variety of everything, more opportunity, more art,
[Amit Varma]: more music, more food, everything is just way better. And cities in that sense are kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, so vibrant. What is your feeling about cities? Because you weren't a city girl
[Guest]: to start with.
[Guest]: No, I wasn't. But I know I lived in Bombay for 15 years. And I'm okay saying Bombay because
[Guest]: that's what it was until I left. I can say that I came to Mumbai yesterday. But I know
[Guest]: that I just felt so much a part of it. And I never thought I'd leave ever. And I totally
[Guest]: relate to what you're saying. There's so much of richness. And, you know, you walk on the
[Guest]: streets, you see wonderful things, you meet people who are interesting all the time. Anyone
[Guest]: you meet is likely to be a person of depth. And you know, the way things work in Bombay,
[Guest]: which is that things really work. I mean, I don't think they happen in other places.
[Guest]: You know, you get your milk every day at the same time. I mean, we gave the Dabbawala Six
[Guest]: Sigma. Everybody in Bombay deserves Six Sigma because everything gets done and it's so complex.
[Guest]: So that's something that I love about Bombay. And, you know, it's something that I don't
[Guest]: know whether I always had it, this thing of being action oriented, being goal oriented,
[Guest]: being kind of immune to hardships. Maybe I already did because that's something that
[Guest]: you get from boarding school also. But it's a very, very Bombay thing. And, you know,
[Guest]: there's theatre, there's music, as you said. And in Bombay, of course, you have the sea,
[Guest]: you can just stand. I love doing this. And I do it whenever I get a chance. Now, you
[Guest]: just walk on Marine Drive and you look at the tide going out and coming in. And there's
[Guest]: so many people. But I wouldn't live in Bombay ever. I just would not. I prefer a much quieter
[Guest]: life. And the main thing is I like to have a lot of space around me, which you can't
[Guest]: when you live in a city. I just feel I love space. I mean, yeah, I'm not saying that I
[Guest]: can't do without it, obviously. But I enjoy it so much. And that it really means a lot
[Guest]: to me to have a lot of space around me. And I think in Bombay, that's not possible. That's
[Guest]: for me, that's the only thing that I have against. Yeah, even the climate, it's a bit
[Guest]: grimy and everything gets dirty, things rust, you can't leave your biscuits out for more
[Guest]: than 10 minutes before this gets soggy. So I like living in Pune.
[Amit Varma]: No, what you said about, you know, how the milk arrives at your doorstep every day at
[Amit Varma]: the same time reminds me of this famous hypothetical question asked by the great French essayist
[Amit Varma]: Frédéric Bastia. This show, by the way, is named after an essay Bastia wrote in the
[Amit Varma]: mid 19th century called That Which is Seen and That Which is Not Seen. And so the question
[Amit Varma]: asked by Bastia was who feeds Paris? And the answer was that you don't need a central planner
[Amit Varma]: to feed Paris, that people have wants, other people want to fulfill their wants in this
[Amit Varma]: win-win game that, you know, all commerce is. And therefore, everything just runs like
[Amit Varma]: clockwork without there being a planner. This is what economists would also call spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: order. And that's sort of one of the glorious things about cities. Let's sort of get back
[Amit Varma]: to your life. You mentioned that in this other school that you went to, you had good teachers.
[Amit Varma]: Do any memorable teachers come to mind?
[Guest]: Well, we had a maths teacher. She was also my housemistress. And she was Mrs. Balakrishnan.
[Guest]: So she was, you know, she loved to cook. And her son, I think she was a widow. She was
[Guest]: widowed very young. And, you know, she joined the boarding school, partly to be independent
[Guest]: and to ensure that her son had the best education. And he was already, I think, in college by
[Guest]: then. So she would cook for us every now and then. She would just cook. She would feel
[Guest]: like cooking. And then she would say, yeah, OK, whoever's hungry, come and eat. She would
[Guest]: do things like that. And boarding school, you know, makes you hungry, hungry all the
[Guest]: time. You finish your meal and then you're looking for food. So so that was something
[Guest]: special about her. And the other thing is that she was our maths teacher for a couple
[Guest]: of years. And I was, I think, quite alert in my maths. So I did quite well in her class.
[Guest]: I remember her. Then I remember our headmistress, headmaster, who I used to write when we were
[Guest]: in school. I used to write for the school magazine. And then I remember, you know, that
[Guest]: encouragement actually made me think that I was a writer. He would call people. I mean,
[Guest]: when we had a visitor, when he had visitors, he would call me across and say, introduce
[Guest]: me as a writer. So that really made me feel that I am a writer, even when I was a child.
[Amit Varma]: So at this point in time, when you were in school, what was sort of your self-image of
[Amit Varma]: yourself in terms of what you wanted to do later on? Like you did maths later on, of
[Amit Varma]: course, and the teacher you mentioned who you liked was a maths teacher. So I'm wondering
[Guest]: if the two were kind of... It might have been, you know, my, but she
[Guest]: was also somebody who did a lot of maths enrichment with us. We would have, you know, maths practicals
[Guest]: where we should do stuff with paper and string and things like that. So I later realised
[Guest]: as a maths teacher myself, that it's very linked to your emotions. Learning maths is
[Guest]: very linked to your emotions. And, you know, if you have a teacher who has no patience
[Guest]: with you, you are never going to get your concepts. Maths needs to be taught in an environment
[Guest]: of friendliness, cordiality and affection and, you know, care. The other thing about
[Guest]: maths is it's cumulative. You can't go on. You know, it's not like you're studying geography
[Guest]: or history where you can do different topics independently. You can't do that with maths.
[Guest]: You can never get to trigonometry if you haven't got your decimals and fractions right. So
[Guest]: if you lose one step, it's finished. You're just never going to get further. So that's
[Guest]: one thing I realised as a maths teacher. So, which I did. My first job actually was a lecturer
[Guest]: in mathematics at Ruperell College in Bombay. And I had this experience when I came to Bombay
[Guest]: to college. So I finished, I was a final year of the 11th standard. We finished CBSC 11th
[Guest]: and after that it became 10 plus 2. So when I came to Bombay, I had to, I couldn't join
[Guest]: the 12th standard because, you know, there you're still in the in the previous level
[Guest]: where you have to study the language and that was absolutely impossible. So they had a provision
[Guest]: for CBSC students to join the degree straight away. So I skipped a year. But what I remember
[Guest]: is coming into class for the first time and even for the first few weeks, everybody was
[Guest]: so depressed. Everybody was so uninterested in what was being taught. And it was like
[Guest]: really difficult. And it was only much later that I realised that everybody was there doing
[Guest]: the first year BSC. They had wanted to get into a professional course. And I was at Jai
[Guest]: Hind College, which was very difficult to get into. So they were students who had finished
[Guest]: their 12th standard at Jai Hind College and didn't make it to a professional course. And
[Guest]: that's why they were doing their FYBSC. They just come and slump on their seats and not
[Guest]: listen and go back. So it was not. So I had some of that again, when I became a teacher
[Guest]: at Rupert Hill College, where they were again, FYBSC. And of course, it gets better in SY
[Guest]: and TY you get the ones who really like maths. I love teaching that TY class. I had students
[Guest]: who we were very fond of each other. Yeah.
[Unknown]: Yeah. And for those who don't know, FY, SY, TY are first year, second year, third year.
[Amit Varma]: I guess you had these two parallel things that you like to write, which is just something
[Amit Varma]: that you're doing. But what what did you think of a career for yourself? Or did you think
[Amit Varma]: of a path for yourself?
[Guest]: So, you know, you asked me this also how my about my, you know, my impression of myself
[Guest]: and what I thought I was going to do. And in school, I actually didn't have any plans
[Guest]: for myself. And I suppose, you know, for my mother, she was a housewife and she didn't
[Guest]: really do much, you know, she was just she didn't she wasn't busy all the time. So I
[Guest]: probably saw myself as having that kind of life. I mean, I'm saying that now at that
[Guest]: time, I don't know what I would have said. I might have said I want to be a firefighter
[Guest]: or a brain surgeon or something, because, you know, I didn't really have any plans. And I did write.
[Guest]: And I knew that I'll always be writing, though, when I went to college, it was so difficult
[Guest]: for me to adjust. And, you know, a person, a hillbilly person who doesn't know much suddenly
[Guest]: thrust into Bombay, where there's so much going on. It takes it takes time to get used
[Guest]: to that. And I actually didn't write for a while. I didn't write for actually quite a
[Guest]: long time. I wrote something for my college magazine once. But after that, it was years
[Guest]: before I started writing again. And I actually started writing again because I needed a way
[Guest]: to earn money. And and that's because I, you know, I knew I'm going to be a single parent
[Guest]: and I can't do that unless I have an income. And I wasn't sure where I was going to stay
[Guest]: and all that. But yeah, that's when I started writing and sending off stuff to be published
[Guest]: in the hope that I would have an income. And it's actually quite funny because it's not
[Guest]: really a good way to have a steady income as a freelancer. And those days was really
[Guest]: I'm sure it's very difficult even now, but it was extremely difficult. But I was very,
[Guest]: very persistent. And along the way, I think one of the things I'm really lucky about is
[Guest]: having an unusual name. So, you know, your byline scene and I was actually offered a
[Guest]: job by the Times, which I wasn't qualified for. I wasn't would never have applied for
[Guest]: because I didn't think I could do it. But and in fact, it happened because I was I received
[Guest]: a telegram one day from the editor's office saying the editor wants to see you. And I
[Guest]: was like, Oh, my God, what did I do? You know, I thought it's like being summoned to the
[Guest]: headmaster's office. I was really spooked out. You got a telegram. I received a telegram.
[Guest]: Yeah, this was back then sort of been what 1989. And I was staying in a place I didn't
[Guest]: have a phone. I was staying in a little rescue home a friend of mine gave me her to convince
[Guest]: her husband to give me their apartment. They had like the investment apartment and they
[Guest]: gave it to me for six months until I got sorted out. So I received a telegram there and I
[Guest]: was really scary. And it was a Saturday. So I phoned the Times office from the public
[Guest]: phone outside and they said that the editor's gone to Pune, Pune and he'd be back on Monday.
[Guest]: I said, I received this telegram that he wants to see me. He says, OK, come and see him.
[Guest]: So I went on Monday and that was Daryl, Daryl DeMonte. And he's such a nice guy. But he
[Guest]: saw me and was like, what do you want? And I said, you sent me a telegram. He said, what?
[Guest]: I don't remember. Because he was like that. He would forget stuff. But anyway, when he
[Guest]: remembered, he he said, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, these dancers people, they are
[Guest]: looking for someone. And will you join? I said, what? It was quite funny because I said,
[Guest]: no, I can't. I've got a child who's like three years old and I can't leave her alone. Don't
[Guest]: you have anyone you can leave her with? No, I don't. Isn't there anybody you can leave
[Guest]: her with? I said, no, there isn't. Doesn't she go to school? I said, yeah, actually,
[Guest]: she just started going to school. Then come while she's at school. We'll give you flexi
[Guest]: time. So and in those days, flexi time was just not known even. I mean, it was a new
[Guest]: word everywhere in the world. But I was really lucky because I said yes. And, you know, that's
[Guest]: how I joined the Times. And once you join the Times, then you're a real person, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's like Dorothy. What was the math journey like before that? Like, what made you study
[Amit Varma]: math? Were you serious about it? Or were you good at it? Like, I was good at it. It was
[Guest]: not my thing. Honestly, I mean, you know, that is the truth. I was good at it. I was
[Guest]: good at school math. And even and then when I was in college, I was not in a good space
[Guest]: to be really enjoying my math. Later on, when I was at the university, again, I had a professor,
[Guest]: Professor Chavate, who's still my Facebook friend, who, you know, we did, what did we
[Guest]: do? Graph theory. And that was so good. I loved it. You know, I had a good professor.
[Guest]: I love the subject. And that's how it should be. But it wasn't something that, in fact,
[Guest]: you know, I had this. After I've completed my, my master's, I was staying in during those
[Guest]: two years at the university, I was staying in the Bhavans College hostel. And that's
[Guest]: because at the university, there was no hostel yet. The university campus was new and they
[Guest]: didn't have a women's hostel. So this was quite far. It was a bit of commute. But they
[Guest]: had a working women's hostel in Bhavans. And so I moved in there. And I had a roommate
[Guest]: there who, Amita, her name was, we became very good friends. So then, you know, when
[Guest]: you have a really good friend and you're actually living with that person, then your life becomes
[Guest]: comfortable. It becomes tolerable and you enjoy, you know, like we used to go out for,
[Guest]: I'm sure those places are still there. We'd go and have dinner out in one of those places
[Guest]: near the hostel every day because the hostel mess was rubbish. But she was going, she'd
[Guest]: come from the UK. Her parents had moved to Gujarat. They had come back to the native
[Guest]: village and she found it very difficult to adapt, you know, like when they came back,
[Guest]: she must have been 17, 18 years old. So she was staying in Bombay and working, but she
[Guest]: convinced her dad that she was going back to live with her uncle in the UK. And so after
[Guest]: my, my dad was very kind. He agreed that he'd give me money to go and travel with her. We
[Guest]: travelled in Europe for three months. For both of us, that was like a big life experience.
[Guest]: She of course had lived in other countries before, but for me, I had only lived in India.
[Guest]: Travelling abroad was very difficult in those days, not like now where it is quite easy.
[Guest]: So it was a big thing. And my dad was, he was like, see, now you're finishing your education,
[Guest]: you will be working and I don't have to support you anymore. So, and this will be the cream
[Guest]: on your education. He said icing, I think he said, this will be the icing. So, and it
[Guest]: was actually because we went off, I went off on my own and we stayed in England with her
[Guest]: uncle for a few weeks. And then we did the Eurail thing in Europe. So this is what, 1982.
[Guest]: And we went, we spent seven weeks travelling in Europe. And it was just amazing. It was
[Guest]: just wonderful, because we saw so much, we learned so much. We weren't, we were backpacking,
[Guest]: but we weren't staying in youth hostels everywhere, because you know how we Indians have friends
[Guest]: and family everywhere. So, and especially at that time, at that time when you didn't
[Guest]: have money to, you couldn't afford it, you know, so you had to be staying in a place
[Guest]: where you didn't have to pay much. So in, my dad was just talking to somebody who asked
[Guest]: him, how's your daughter or how are your kids? And he said, oh, my daughter's going to Europe.
[Guest]: And he said, oh, I have a friend in Paris. So this friend in Paris came and picked us
[Guest]: up at the station, we stayed in her home, she took us around. In the south of France,
[Guest]: we stayed with her sister, in the north of France, we stayed with her mother, and so
[Guest]: on in every other place, like whether it was Germany, Switzerland, in Italy, and in Holland,
[Guest]: we made our own arrangements. But in Denmark, I stayed with my dentist's neighbor's daughter.
[Guest]: And this is true. We got exposed to traveling alone, we got exposed to different kinds of
[Guest]: food and you just change as a person, right? You realize that I can do things on my own.
[Guest]: And then when I came back, I went to collect my degree certificate at the university and
[Guest]: Dr. Chavate, who I was telling you about my graph theory teacher, she asked me what you're
[Guest]: going to do now. And I said, I don't know, I'm looking for a job. She said, okay, they
[Guest]: have a leave vacancy at Rupperell College. And so that's how I got that job. I was there
[Guest]: for three years. And then I quit when I was expecting a baby. Yeah, so that was how the
[Guest]: whole maths things happened. But before that, I would always have people coming to me for
[Guest]: help or I think I was the tuition teacher of most of my cousins and some neighbors and
[Guest]: stuff. And then later on, when I was staying on my own, and, you know, working at the Times,
[Guest]: I ran the Saturday group, where kids would come and we do maths enrichment, like what
[Guest]: Mrs. Balakrishnan taught us. And she actually I inherited a bunch of books from her. So
[Guest]: I made stuff, you know, worksheets and experiments and things like that, which I did with my
[Guest]: kids also later. And, you know, I still have these friends of my kids who I'm very, very
[Guest]: fond of who remember that. They were my kids, of course, for them, I don't think it was
[Guest]: great fun. But, you know, I have these two friends, my kids' friends, lovely, lovely
[Guest]: people who still remember the maths experiments that we did during the summer holidays. But
[Guest]: that's all over now become completely, I can't remember whether it's left or right brain,
[Guest]: but whatever the other side is, where you are just creative and you go with the flow
[Guest]: and you know, you don't really, I mean, I can still remember strings of numbers, but
[Guest]: I don't bother.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that and this is really possibly a question about two things which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: might be dually connected. So there may not be causation going one way, but both ways.
[Amit Varma]: Did studying math the way you did change the way you think about stuff? Or was it the case
[Amit Varma]: that you were the kind of person who thought about stuff in a particular systematic way?
[Guest]: And therefore math came easily to you?
[Guest]: Actually, that's a question that I sometimes ask myself, but I'm not sure. And it is true
[Guest]: that I think very systematically, I'm not sure which came first. I think it might be
[Guest]: influenced by maths. I do and I find it easy. Like it helps me a lot my writing, you know,
[Guest]: putting separating different ideas. And there is definitely a maths influence. I don't know
[Amit Varma]: which came first. That's yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the other question is also about a sort of a two way connection about teaching and
[Amit Varma]: the empathy that it demands. And equally, you would imagine that if someone is naturally
[Amit Varma]: empathetic, they'll be better teachers. But also teaching can teach you to look at each
[Amit Varma]: individual more carefully. Like I think what we tend to do in our lives is that most people
[Amit Varma]: for us are a sea of faces, or they are instrumental to us for particular purposes. But both teaching
[Amit Varma]: and writing, in a sense, force you to look at individuals as individuals. You know, as
[Amit Varma]: a teacher, you got to figure out, okay, why is she having trouble with binomials or whatever
[Amit Varma]: the case might be, and you try to kind of figure that out. And as a writer, also, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you're writing about somebody, you just look at them completely differently from
[Amit Varma]: what you would otherwise, right?
[Guest]: So actually, you know, it's so interesting that you say this, I hadn't thought about
[Guest]: that. But I'm not sure whether it's empathy, but I know that one of the things that I do
[Guest]: now, and I've done it for a really long time, not just these last 10 years, when I've been
[Guest]: working on Sindhi stories and being an oral historian, but listening to people when they
[Guest]: tell me about whatever they want to tell me that I'm writing about. And I think there's
[Guest]: something, I don't know what it is that happens, people speak, you know, the way that I'm talking
[Guest]: to you, absolutely opening up, people do that. So I don't know what it is that gives some
[Guest]: people the gift that when you're listening, the other person just tells them everything.
[Guest]: And I don't know whether it's a skill that helped me as a teacher. I'm not sure. I know
[Guest]: that I had a lot of kids who really liked me a lot. But I don't think there were any
[Guest]: kids who didn't like me. I'm not sure whether I was able to do what you're saying. I mean,
[Guest]: I wish I should have, maybe I did. I don't remember, you know, looking at each person
[Guest]: separately. But when it comes to an interview, yes, absolutely. I mean, I'm not there at
[Guest]: all, you know, it's just that person and letting them be who they are.
[Amit Varma]: And is that a learned skill? Because when I even listen to the really early episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the show, or when I think back on how I just talk to people through my life, and typically,
[Amit Varma]: what most of us do, and I noticed this more and more and others, now that I've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: thought much more about conversation is that most people aren't really listening, listening,
[Amit Varma]: right? It's even called we once said that we listen to respond not to understand. So
[Amit Varma]: most people when they listen, they're not completely absenting themselves from the scene
[Amit Varma]: and just listening and taking in what is there. They'll be listening with ego in there. Maybe
[Amit Varma]: they're just looking for that moment when they can interject with their wisdom and their
[Amit Varma]: views and their whatever. So was there a sense of a conscious thinking about the craft either
[Amit Varma]: when as a journalist or when you were, you know, writing with people, or later on when
[Amit Varma]: you started doing oral histories? Is there an intentionality to how you do what you do?
[Guest]: Actually, you know, I don't think it's a process of learning, but I do think that you improve
[Guest]: with practice. And I definitely think that you do improve with practice. And this thing
[Guest]: of interjecting, I know I do it. I know I used to do it a lot more than I do now. And
[Guest]: you know, one should really wait until but then sometimes somebody says something and
[Guest]: you have to respond. I mean, you you you don't have to, but you do respond. And then later
[Guest]: on when I'm listening to recording, I say, Oh, I miss that, you know, so that still happens
[Guest]: to me. But I can remember really early, when I was still, I still just joined the Times.
[Guest]: And what I was doing for the Times at that time is we, we were launching Ascent. So I
[Guest]: was launching Ascent for the Times. So in those days, we had the appointments ads inside
[Guest]: the newspapers, it was towards the end of the paper. And somebody got the idea. And
[Guest]: it was an idea. It's not an original idea. It was being done in the UK, I think, where
[Guest]: you had a pullout for the ads. And what I had to do was fill the half a page of the
[Guest]: first page with articles from industry. And, you know, get people to write based on their
[Guest]: experience. So it was really wonderful, because, you know, people were talking about things
[Guest]: that they really knew it wasn't about something that you'd learned at college, it wasn't theory,
[Guest]: it was their experiences, and they were sharing their learnings. So for me, it was a it was
[Guest]: huge. It was a new field. The only thing that I was I brought to it was listening to people
[Guest]: when they spoke, sometimes they would write and send in stuff. But a lot of times that
[Guest]: I was helping them to write it. And I remember this one sitting with somebody who was the
[Guest]: HR head at Cadbury's. And we were talking, and he was telling me stuff. And then he started
[Guest]: crying. He, you know, he hit a emotion. And I didn't. I mean, you know, I waited and just
[Guest]: kind of, but that's when I realized that when you listen to people, they might react in
[Guest]: a way they wouldn't do in a social situation. So it's a privilege, you know, you can't.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to really respect that and be kind to them or whatever, or just, you
[Guest]: know, not kind sounds like patronizing. That's not the way I meant it. But yeah, so then
[Guest]: I think that that incident never left me because I realized that it's something that you have
[Guest]: to do carefully.
[Amit Varma]: And what is it about and this is something of course, I've noticed as well that people
[Amit Varma]: really open up that you might imagine, in our everyday interactions, there is always
[Amit Varma]: a filter, there's always a certain degree of reserve that is there. But once you get
[Amit Varma]: into that a certain groove, people really open up in the good places. And I've also,
[Amit Varma]: you know, had the privilege of people trusting me enough to open up in that way. And, and
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of happened a lot. And I wonder about why that is that if it is so easy and
[Amit Varma]: often so rewarding to open up and to open yourself up to others opening up, but why
[Amit Varma]: we don't do more of that, because most of the time, we pretty much wear a mask through
[Amit Varma]: our everyday lives where we are not saying what we think we're hiding our emotions and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. But when you have a particular setting, when I'm having a conversation with
[Amit Varma]: someone for the show, when you're doing your oral history or whatever, it just tumbles
[Guest]: out, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you're making yourself more vulnerable. Of course. I also I find it, you
[Guest]: know, like, my what I do, apart from the Sindhi work, I work with people to help them write
[Guest]: their memoirs. And that is the biggest. I mean, you know, I love those projects, because
[Guest]: they, you know, people talk to you, and they do what you're saying. It's not just like
[Guest]: two hours or four hours or six hours. It's like days together where they talk about everything
[Guest]: that's ever happened to them in their lives. And then you interview other people also to
[Guest]: get cues on what you can get out of them. Or you look at that period of history that
[Guest]: they went through where lots of stuff was going on. So then, you know, again, that brings
[Guest]: out more stuff. And I feel that for somebody who's doing that, I mean, all the people that
[Guest]: I've worked with, they found that process so fulfilling, you know, because you're going
[Guest]: through your like, making sense of what has happened to you right through your life. Very,
[Guest]: very therapeutic. And then you know, you come to these relationship issues that you had,
[Guest]: and even those you're able to surmount those many times, not always, of course. So why
[Guest]: we don't do it? Yeah, that's a good question. I think maybe people don't realize how powerful
[Guest]: and how effective it is, how useful it is. I also feel as somebody who has used professional
[Guest]: psychotherapist ever since I started, I became financially independent, I knew that I need
[Guest]: to work on my mental health. And I did that ever since I was like 22 or something. And
[Guest]: I know from that experience, that very often, you find people who are really not good, you
[Guest]: know, they are really, really not good. They're just not good. Either they exploit you in
[Guest]: one way or the other, or they medicate you. I never stopped trying, though, you know,
[Guest]: I kept doing it. And I still have someone in Pune, who I see, I mean, it's been a long
[Guest]: time, we had one session during the lockdown. But I've been with her for about 10 years,
[Guest]: or maybe more now. And she's so good. But yeah, you don't find people at home. And ultimately,
[Guest]: when you think about it, when you're with a therapist, it's actually you who are doing
[Guest]: all the work. You just need somebody who listens the right way. You don't really need anything
[Guest]: else. So yeah, I think since you asked why we don't do it, I think that's my answer that
[Guest]: it's not that safe.
[Amit Varma]: You know, carrying on from that thought, could it be the case that like one lament I have
[Amit Varma]: about many people and even myself at times is that there's not enough self reflection,
[Amit Varma]: most people don't reflect enough on themselves. And I think what the act of say, going into
[Amit Varma]: therapy with someone you trust, or just talking or having friends with whom you can have these
[Amit Varma]: kind of conversations, what it does is that it forces you to self reflect, even if you're
[Amit Varma]: talking about your life to somebody else, just that act of laying it all out there forces
[Amit Varma]: you to look at it in a different way, and can help you see things that would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: have been unseen to you, right. And in a sense, it's like the act of memory is also an act
[Amit Varma]: of reconstructing the self. Like earlier, you mentioned that, when you look back at
[Amit Varma]: your childhood, you can now looking back, say that, oh, she just wanted to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just chill be in the groove, be like a mother. But you said that you wouldn't, you can't
[Amit Varma]: think now what she would have wanted then. So in a sense, that person is gone. In a sense,
[Amit Varma]: what is left in your memory is your reconstruction of that person from your mature vantage point
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But that person is gone. And I'm sure just looking back at that person
[Amit Varma]: can make you a better person today, if that kind of makes sense.
[Guest]: I totally agree with you. I mean, this is one of the aims of therapy, right, is to reconcile
[Guest]: yourself with who you were right through all the, you know, ups and downs of your life.
[Guest]: I also feel that when I'm working with someone on their memoirs, this is exactly what happens,
[Guest]: you know, this is exactly what happens. They go through every phase of their life,
[Guest]: connected with who they are now, feel good about each part of, you know, even the things
[Guest]: that happened that were bad, how well they faced those times or the mistakes they made.
[Guest]: Sometimes, you know, it's so nice when you have somebody who has been ashamed of something
[Guest]: all their lives because it was a mistake or because people made fun of them. And they
[Guest]: realize, hey, like, it wasn't such a big deal, you know, I mean, those kind of moments happen.
[Guest]: And they are just fantastic. They're just like, we all should do that. We all should do that.
[Guest]: We all should go through all the disappointments of our lives and put them in context. And,
[Guest]: you know, and then you see them more like jewels in your existence rather than something to hide
[Guest]: or be ashamed of.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's double click a little bit on this ghostwriting stuff. You've ghostwritten a
[Amit Varma]: bunch of books.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'd love to talk about that. When I started the first book I did for someone,
[Guest]: this was way back in 2005, a friend of mine in Pune, she said, I want to meet you, there's
[Guest]: something I want to talk to you about. And I went to see her. And she said, you know,
[Guest]: my father-in-law's turning 80 and we want to do a book for him. And will you do it?
[Guest]: And I said, yeah, I mean, you pay me and I'll do it. Because at that time, having an income
[Guest]: was extremely important to me. I really needed it. So, you know, this is the thing. This
[Guest]: is actually my story. Most of my creativity and all these projects have emerged from economic
[Guest]: need. You know, I started writing that way when I was, how old was I, 28, 29 or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so I, now we work together and she's like a wise woman. So she would record his
[Guest]: stories and come and we'd sit together and we'd listen to him. And we'd talk about what
[Guest]: he was saying. And she would have stuff to add because she knew him really well. She'd
[Guest]: been married into the family and living in the same home since she was like 18 years
[Guest]: old or something. So then we wrote the book. I wrote the first book. I wrote the first
[Guest]: book. I wrote it, of course, words were mine, but, you know, the material was coming from
[Guest]: her and from his interviews. And there was this thing where the book is written by so
[Guest]: and so person and it's in his voice. And I'm proud of that. It's in his voice. And I did
[Guest]: that because that's my skill. I can speak, listen to somebody and I can speak in his
[Guest]: voice. And I that's something that I could do even when I was a kid, you know, so that's
[Guest]: my core skill. So here, you know, it was a wonderful thing that happened by coincidence.
[Guest]: I was able to monetize my core skill. But then there comes that little bit of, you know,
[Guest]: you've been a ghostwriter and that's something which is not a good thing. I remember this.
[Guest]: I was so this is the way people look at it, right? I don't look at it like that. So I
[Guest]: would say I'm a ghostwriter and with a straight face without really it's, you know, people's
[Guest]: reactions are like they sneer. Even if it's somebody who can't write two sentences themselves,
[Guest]: they would still sneer because you're a ghostwriter. I remember this when my first
[Guest]: synth book was picked up by Oxford University Press and they wanted a few lines about myself.
[Guest]: I said, I mean, I mean, I don't remember exactly what I sent them, but the word ghostwriter was
[Guest]: there and they found that really so objectionable. They didn't want to use that word at all.
[Guest]: And that's when I realized that, you know, it's like saying I'm a bootlegger with pride,
[Guest]: you know, actually. So I actually what I do is I work with people to help them write their
[Guest]: memoirs. You know, that's what I do. So I mean, you want to call it ghostwriting. That's OK
[Guest]: with me. But I know that what I'm doing is something which requires a high degree of
[Guest]: high degree of skill. It requires a lot of patience. It requires being able to understand
[Guest]: not just what happened in that person's life, but also use that person's words to relate so
[Guest]: that when somebody is reading that book, they're with that guy, with that person, him or her.
[Guest]: And they only know at the end of the book or when, you know, whatever, that it was actually
[Guest]: written by someone else. But back then, when I was still feeling a little defensive, maybe I am
[Guest]: still a little defensive about it because, you know, I've given you such a long explanation.
[Guest]: But what I wanted to say is that you look at the autobiography of Malcolm X, for example.
[Guest]: Now, who wrote the autobiography of Malcolm X?
[Guest]: Alex Haley.
[Guest]: There you are. You know that. So it was Alex Haley who wrote. Now, would you call Alex Haley
[Guest]: a ghostwriter? Yeah, I suppose you would. I mean, you know, I like to compare myself with Alex Haley.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And the great sportswriter Rohit Brijnath wrote Abhinav Bindra's
[Amit Varma]: book, for example. Ghostwriting is an honorable tradition. I've done a little bit of it back in
[Amit Varma]: the day when I, you know, used to work for Vizneshia Cricket before we bought Cricket 4,
[Amit Varma]: even after I was in Cricket 4, where there were ex-cricketers who wrote columns for us. And
[Amit Varma]: it was my job to, you know, speak to them every after every day's play and get their views down
[Amit Varma]: and try to kind of recreate it. It's quite an art. And what I imagine you are doing in that sense is
[Amit Varma]: again, it's that act of listening, opening yourself up, keeping yourself out of the story,
[Amit Varma]: just taking in everything they tell you and also looking at another person at that kind of depth,
[Amit Varma]: with a kind of depth with which you'd perhaps only know your own family members, if that.
[Guest]: No, family members may not open themselves up to you that much. I mean, if it's your partner,
[Guest]: yeah, maybe you know that person really well. But I don't think I would open myself up that
[Guest]: much to my parents. And I mean, I'd be grateful if my children open themselves whenever they do
[Guest]: open themselves up to me. But I don't expect them to do that to that extent unless they really want
[Guest]: to. I mean, you know, then that's a gift. But yeah, so yeah, you it's a different kind of equation
[Guest]: when somebody's and it's often becomes a lifelong relationship. But sometimes it just ends right
[Guest]: there, you know, because they don't they don't need you anymore. And that's it. That's fine,
[Guest]: which is also OK. But I have had some people who would remember you and they, you know, they stay
[Guest]: in touch because you delve their depths and connected with them and showed them stuff. You
[Guest]: used words which they value so much because they really represent them the way that they want to
[Guest]: be represented, the way they see themselves. So that does become a solid relationship.
[Guest]: It has been for some of my people I've worked with.
[Amit Varma]: I'm interested in that is that they value the words that you use because I guess they may not
[Amit Varma]: have been able to put it that way without naming a person. Can you give an example?
[Guest]: No, I'll give you a person of an extraordinary. I'll give you an example with the name of somebody
[Guest]: who was a brilliant intellectual, and that was Dr. N.P. Tolani. He was born in Sindh. He went,
[Guest]: he came from a family of Zamindars. So they had huge land holding in the north of Sindh.
[Guest]: And he went to study at Cornell. He was studying agricultural engineering so that,
[Guest]: you know, that would be good for the farms. And when he came back, it was 1947 and partition took
[Guest]: place. So he landed in Bombay and he stayed on in Bombay and his parents were still in Larkana.
[Guest]: And he went to visit and everything was different because people had left. His father did not want
[Guest]: to leave. But in the end, he was forced to leave because he was put in prison under pretext of
[Guest]: being an Indian spy. And he was in jail and his eldest son was the Sessions judge in Sukkur,
[Guest]: where he was in jail. But nobody could do anything. The only thing is that the prison guards knew that
[Guest]: when the judge visits, he touches this prisoner's feet. So we have to look after him well.
[Guest]: Eventually, after several months by which he, you know, this rich middle aged man in prison,
[Guest]: he was a skeleton. He was allowed to leave if he left Pakistan and never returned to Pakistan. So
[Guest]: it was obviously because of his land he was asked to leave. Now, Nandilal, he had come back from
[Guest]: with this degree. He had to start afresh. He didn't have any lands to go to. He started building
[Guest]: earthen dams for the government of India in Maharashtra and Gujarat, living in the interiors.
[Guest]: And he did that and he did it for several years. And then he, so he was he was this amazing guy.
[Guest]: I mean, he's the most amazing person I ever met in my life, ever had the good fortune to work with.
[Guest]: His father was doing building. So, you know, a lot of Sindhis, they had nothing, right? And they
[Guest]: needed homes. And there was a housing crisis. So the housing board came up, new housing,
[Guest]: Bombay Housing Board. And there was a chairman who he left his high paying corporate job in
[Guest]: Ahmedabad and came and joined as honorary chairman. And I don't know the facts because I haven't
[Guest]: looked at the papers, but I would assume that he had something to do with setting up loans and stuff.
[Guest]: So his father, Nandilal's father, Pribdas Tolani, he started building buildings in Bombay. And he,
[Guest]: Nandilal got into this as well. And he didn't enjoy it at all because of the corruption.
[Guest]: So he left to go to Cornell to do his PhD. And he completed his PhD in a year and a half. And
[Guest]: he would have probably, I forget, I think it was 14 months, a record at Cornell,
[Guest]: which was his alma mater. He'd studied at Cornell for his master's as well.
[Guest]: So his father wanted him back. So he came back. He would have liked to live a life of academia.
[Guest]: But he came back because his father wanted him back. And he started a shipping company.
[Guest]: So where I'm coming to is that now here's a person, he used to sail himself. He was a bridge
[Guest]: player. So he was somebody who lived life to the full. You know, he was using his mind, he was
[Guest]: using his body, he was making a lot of money. And he was doing a lot of philanthropy. He started
[Guest]: the Tolani College of Commerce, which is in Andheri East. And later on, he also started
[Guest]: Tolani Maritime Institution, which is in Talegaon. It's one of the best recognized
[Guest]: maritime institutions in the world. When his daughter asked me to work with him on his
[Guest]: memoirs, he was blind. So I had to listen to him and I wrote down stuff. He just loved what I wrote
[Guest]: so much. And that is something that means so much to me, because he would, and especially,
[Guest]: you know, we did because Sujata also, that's his daughter, she also worked very closely with me,
[Guest]: deciding the structure of the book and, you know, various things, giving me the photographs.
[Guest]: And he, one thing I noticed, he would talk about is that people call me lucky. And I didn't like
[Guest]: that. Because, you know, I wasn't luck. I mean, I was working, I was using my brains, I was doing
[Guest]: this. And then, you know, you're calling me lucky. It sounds like insulting. So, you know, at the end
[Guest]: of the book, I wrote this thing for him, which he had told me in different ways and different,
[Guest]: at different times about, I forget what the chapters called. But it starts off by saying,
[Guest]: yes, I've been really lucky. I was so lucky to be born to this family. And, you know, all the
[Guest]: things that happened to him and explaining that, you know, it's not just luck. And that he used to
[Guest]: keep making her read to him, because it kind of reflected what he'd said and what he wanted to
[Guest]: be remembered for. So that's what, you know, he's not somebody who couldn't find the words himself.
[Guest]: He was like an intellectual himself and very articulate. But yeah, that was me ghostwriting,
[Guest]: one of my hero moments in ghostwriting.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel this process changed you as well? Like, was it also rewarding for you?
[Guest]: So yeah, it has been very rewarding for me in many ways, because most of the people I've worked
[Guest]: with, they have been wealthy enough to pay my fee. And they have been captains of industry,
[Guest]: which means that they started most of them with nothing. And they built up their empires. And
[Guest]: through them, I became intimately acquainted with the industrial history of India. So that's
[Guest]: something that really helped me gave me a grounding in that field. How else did it help me as a
[Guest]: person? I think so. One of the things that really has helped me is working with so many Sindhi
[Guest]: people who lost everything and then started again. So that has helped me as a person to
[Guest]: know that no problem is insurmountable, you know, that bad things happen, and you just have to keep
[Guest]: going and new things will happen. And then you'll have to deal with them, whatever they are. So I
[Guest]: think that's one of the biggest changes. So many people, everybody who I've interviewed, they lost
[Guest]: everything. And then they kept going. So you know, that whole thing, and I think I already had that
[Guest]: in me, because you know, I had already by the time I came to this point where I was interviewing them,
[Guest]: I'd already been through quite a lot of rough times in life. And I was that already that kind
[Guest]: of person who would say, Okay, fine, what do I do next? But I think this really supported me. And
[Guest]: even the small things, you know, like, for example, oh, the bai left, oh, no, you know,
[Guest]: it was really, really, because my obviously, I rely on my house help, I completely rely on them,
[Guest]: I can't be productive unless I have somebody else doing most of my domestic work for me. So it is,
[Guest]: um, it sounds like really, what's the word? I mean, I don't want to say it sounds like I'm,
[Guest]: you know, too privileged or something. But maybe it's about understanding my priorities and knowing
[Guest]: that if I didn't have somebody doing all this, somebody really smart, who I can rely on, and who
[Guest]: does things my way, I can't do what I want to do. So you know, even when the bai leaves, yeah,
[Guest]: okay, fine, I have to look for someone else. Let's see who turns up. Let's see how well I can train
[Guest]: them, you know, so it's just a more of okay, let's get on with it rather than Oh, no, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, this is David Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage,
[Amit Varma]: you, you are good at writing, you might also be good at doing housework, but it's a better use
[Guest]: of your time. I'm very good at doing, I mean, I'm not good at cleaning, but I'm really good. I mean,
[Guest]: I can cook so fast, I can really cook up a meal. And because I had a big family, and you know,
[Guest]: well, a lot of times I was on my own.
[Amit Varma]: Does your mathematical brain also is it part of the way that you cook?
[Guest]: Absolutely. I am so rigid, you know, when I'm when I have to do 10 things, I know which one
[Guest]: to do first to save time and effort. And I'll have a sequence. And if anyone gets in my way,
[Guest]: then it's really annoying. I mean, I have worked very hard not to be annoyed with people who
[Guest]: are less efficient. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Final question about ghostwriting. How much time does each of these memoirs take you?
[Guest]: So it all depends. It doesn't take too long, probably to the interviews will be over two or
[Guest]: three months. And then depending on how many people they want in the book. Now, I'd like to
[Guest]: interview important people other than the person themselves, because they'll tell me things I can
[Guest]: ask them, ask the subject, and which they may not remember. So the people close to them in their
[Guest]: family and their work, their friends. So it depends on how many I have access to, I think less than a
[Guest]: year to get the whole thing done. Now, we did one recently, which I started, I think in February.
[Guest]: February. And in fact, Veda did the design for that. And she did the fab design. We it was his
[Guest]: birthday on the 27th of July and was really cutting it fine. But we did it and really came out well.
[Guest]: Veda for the sake of the listeners.
[Guest]: That's my daughter. Yeah, she, she is not. I mean, she never went to Parsons design school
[Guest]: or anything, which is very talented. And yeah, I'm lucky that she gives her time to my projects
[Amit Varma]: on and off. And also a trained classical guitarist.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, there's that as well. She's a, she studied computer science, and then she decided
[Guest]: not to be a software developer. And then she got a job with Pune Mirror, that Pune Mirror was just
[Guest]: starting Pune, so she was part of their startup team. And then she worked in marketing communications
[Guest]: for a few, three years in Pune Mirror. So I'm giving you Veda's CV as well, in case you want
[Guest]: to give her a job. And then yeah, all the while she was studying classical guitar and became a
[Guest]: very big thing for her because she took over the classical guitar festival in Calcutta and ran it
[Guest]: very successfully for quite a long time and enjoyed it a lot. Yeah. And she's a yoga teacher
[Guest]: now in case anyone wants to do online yoga with Veda.
[Amit Varma]: Just yeah, if there's a link for that, I'll put that in the show notes as well.
[Amit Varma]: When I was a kid, I remember reading about a link between music, math and chess and I was a
[Amit Varma]: chess player, of course, at that time. So I don't know if you play chess, but is there a link between
[Guest]: music and math, you think? Are you into music? I think there is. I am not a musician, despite my
[Guest]: name, despite, you know, having musical offspring, but I'm not a musician. But yeah, in Veda's case,
[Guest]: definitely, you know, she also had the maths talent. And I think it I think and I love chess,
[Guest]: I love chess, I'm not very good because I don't play that much. And most of the time when I play,
[Guest]: I don't concentrate. I mean, these are just excuses. I'm actually a lousy player. But I love
[Guest]: the game. And I, I totally agree that there's a connection. I mean, you know, music. I remember
[Guest]: reading this for the first time in a Mallory Towers, Mallory Towers? Yeah, they had this
[Guest]: somebody who was really good at both maths and music. I knew I'm not good at music. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: there's probably a connection. So let's, let's sort of go back to your sort of writing career.
[Amit Varma]: You were, you know, you taught math for a while. Yeah. But how did you get drawn towards,
[Amit Varma]: you know, going beyond writing as a recreational thing to actually, you know, writing, writing for
[Guest]: a living? I started, I knew I had to earn a living, right? I knew I had to. So I started writing
[Guest]: because that was a thing I could do at home when the child is sleeping. And so I started doing that.
[Guest]: And then again, when you're writing from home, it's always going to be, oh, well, this is what
[Guest]: my dog and me did, you know, so it's not going to be something about world affairs or anything like
[Guest]: that. But it started like that. I started with the Times of India Middles, which was the most
[Guest]: exciting thing because, you know, it's something that everybody in those days, the Times of India
[Guest]: was a real newspaper. Everybody read it. The edit page was real. And you could not get into
[Guest]: the middle unless the quality of what you'd written was excellent. So it was a big deal.
[Guest]: And they paid 500 rupees, which really meant a lot to me because my budget was 2000 rupees per
[Guest]: month, including the rent. And, you know, so that was all I had to do was one middle of week and I
[Guest]: was through. Of course, it didn't quite work like that. But yeah, I was very focused on earning
[Guest]: through writing. And, you know, when you're focused like that, you get opportunities. I did.
[Guest]: I was writing. I was working for the Times of writing for other newspapers,
[Guest]: sometimes using my mother's name or a made up byline or something like that. So I did that for
[Guest]: the income. And then after a few years, I think I was with the Times for three years. And that's when
[Guest]: I got married and moved to Pune. I tried doing the commute. I would just come in on a Monday and
[Guest]: go back on a Tuesday. So I was working in the office to make the pages. Basically, the other
[Guest]: stuff could be done through occasional meetings, through the telephone and things like that. So it
[Guest]: worked for a few months. And then I just realized for various reasons, this is not such a good idea.
[Guest]: So I had three kids. They were young. How old were they? Five, six, seven, something like that.
[Guest]: And, you know, here I am a math tuition teacher myself, and my kids are not doing that well in
[Guest]: math. So I just kind of left and became a math tuition teacher all over again. But I was still
[Guest]: writing and I was so lucky to get a column with the Sunday Midday. That was like, you know,
[Guest]: now I can die happy moment for me. And I had a column with Sunday Midday for a really long time
[Guest]: after that. And again, it was something that I could do without leaving the house. The first
[Guest]: column I had was, it was called In a Manner of Speaking. And that was about language. It was
[Guest]: about words, the way words are used, and, you know, looking at different situations. And it's
[Guest]: so nice. It was so useful for me to have been able to think like that for a few years, because now
[Guest]: in the work which I'm doing, which is in the space of partition, words are so important. You know,
[Guest]: when you hear people saying, I came to India, and everybody says that, and actually, they were
[Guest]: already in India. People say, I came to India. Actually, you were in India, you came to the new
[Guest]: India, you came to the truncated India. It's like you, you did, of course, come to a new place,
[Guest]: but it's like you were an outsider, you know, it's that feeling of being an outsider, and you
[Guest]: weren't really Indian, and you came to India, you know, things like that, and many things like that.
[Amit Varma]: So back in the day, when you would do your columns, you know, that's pre-internet,
[Amit Varma]: that's pre-everything. How do you?
[Guest]: It wasn't actually, this was in the early, in 93, I think. 94, no, it was 94 December,
[Guest]: when I started with the Sunday Midday. I think it was. And so yeah, we I used to send in my stuff
[Guest]: by email. I used to email in my stuff, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But sort of in terms of getting your ideas, researching all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so there was no Wikipedia back then. I used to read books, I used to buy books,
[Guest]: and you know, I used to talk to people, read the newspapers, read, yeah, you know,
[Guest]: when you're writing about language and contemporary language, partly it's what you see and hear around
[Guest]: you, you know, if you're, and I was working in a software company for some time. So, you know,
[Guest]: people use language differently there. So I can write a column on that. I don't remember,
[Guest]: yeah, then I mean, you know, if you're an MBA, you use certain words. So yeah, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: different communities use words differently.
[Amit Varma]: And would you have noticed this stuff anyway, as a natural course of things? Or
[Amit Varma]: does the fact that you're writing this column, suddenly open your ears to this?
[Guest]: That's a good question. Yeah, I think I would have noticed anyway, but I wouldn't have made
[Guest]: such a big thing out of it. Because, yeah, I'm sure like, even you would write if you,
[Guest]: you know, when even though you're not writing a column on language, you are noticing it when
[Guest]: people speak like that. I mean, for a lot of us, for whom language is so important,
[Guest]: and who can change their way of speaking when they're talking to different people,
[Guest]: we always notice, right, even if you're not conscious of it. Like, I have a feeling you do
[Guest]: this too, whoever you're speaking to, you speak to them using the words that they speak when they
[Guest]: use when they speak to you. I think so. So in a way, you have noticed, even if you're not writing
[Amit Varma]: about it. Yeah, but it's subconscious, one doesn't think about it. So, you know, if someone is
[Amit Varma]: speaking to me in Hindi, I'll also speak to them in Hindi, and it will kind of be like that. And,
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes you also notice the different ways in which people treat language, like I did a
[Amit Varma]: recent episode with the Dalit scholar Chandrabhan Prasad, who makes it a point in all his interviews
[Amit Varma]: to speak only in English. And, you know, so before we recorded, we were just chatting away in Hindi,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, natural flow. But the moment we started English, and of course, I knew why,
[Guest]: and I kind of respected that. It's so important. And, and the reason for that, and this is
[Amit Varma]: something he's written about as well, is that caste is so ingrained in language, the kind of
[Amit Varma]: words that we use, not just a casual caste slurs that come up in everyday English language, like,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, not just in those ways where people use caste terms casually,
[Amit Varma]: but even in like, the point he keeps making is that, you know, he hates Hindi, because in Hindi,
[Amit Varma]: you know, somebody will say Pranam. And that is an act of, you know, bowing your head down.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in English, it is good morning, good morning, there's that equality. And listening
[Amit Varma]: to Chandrabhanji, you know, explain all this, sort of made me think differently about this stuff as
[Amit Varma]: well, because we don't often look closely enough at language. I'd done an episode with Shrena
[Amit Varma]: Bhattacharya called The Loneliness of the Indian Woman, she's written a great book about just that.
[Amit Varma]: And her point, one point she made was that when women talk about getting married, they say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they don't say,
[Unknown]: so it is that passive thing, something is happening to me, marriage is happening,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so it's, oh, that's really interesting. And this is stuff that it was your bread and
[Guest]: butter to notice. So, yeah, that's right. But yeah, as you said, it came to me naturally,
[Guest]: because I would notice anyway, and I still do. And, yeah, I think I'm quite conscious of,
[Guest]: yeah, using words in a certain way, so that people will get a certain impression of who I am.
[Amit Varma]: And what are the other sort of other kind of columns you wrote earlier?
[Guest]: You mentioned a lot of columns. So for Pune papers, I had presumptuous enough, actually,
[Guest]: features editor was Vinita Deshmukh at that time. And she asked me, she had dinner at my place one
[Guest]: day, and she got me to do a cookery column for her for a while. And then that turned into a column
[Guest]: about child rearing. And when I think about it now, that was so awfully presumptuous of me,
[Guest]: because honestly, what do I know about child rearing, you know? I mean, what does anyone ever
[Guest]: know about child rearing? But you had reared children. I was in the process of rearing them.
[Guest]: Yeah. And I was enjoying it a lot. I mean, I really had a good time. I think I probably
[Guest]: enjoyed it a lot more than they did. But yeah, so I did that. Then I had a column with the
[Guest]: Maharashtra Herald also for about three years, where I could write anything I wanted. So that
[Guest]: was so nice. I could just write about like I was saying, you know, last week, me and my dog did
[Guest]: this and that. Although I'm saying dog, I'm not a dog person. We had dogs when we were children, but
[Guest]: I'm just not a dog person, unfortunately. I had a really good time. Now when I look at those,
[Guest]: I'm very vain, Amit. I can't tell you how vain I am. I love to read. And they help me, you know,
[Guest]: when I read something I've written in the past, like if I'm stuck and, you know, I do assignments,
[Guest]: right? Somebody asked me, will you write this? And I say, yes. I can't say no. I never say no.
[Guest]: So then the words don't come. Then I go back to something I've written in the past, which I'm
[Guest]: admired after it's appeared. And then I read it again. And then the words flow.
[Guest]: You know, so my Maharashtra Herald columns, which obviously hardly anyone ever read,
[Guest]: I've read them a lot because they were really good. And then I did, I did for Sunday Midday,
[Guest]: I was their books guy for a long time. And that was like a real plum of an assignment because
[Guest]: that was when the Jaipur festival had just started. So, you know, we'd get flown down and
[Guest]: put up and we'd have access to all the authors and you could interview whoever you wanted and
[Guest]: you attended all the events. Oh, that was really, really special. One of the things I did for Sunday
[Guest]: Midday, again, something I'm so, so proud of, is I for several weeks, I don't know how they let me
[Guest]: do that. They would give me like a whole page, sometimes even two pages, where I was parodying
[Guest]: another writer. So I did, obviously, P.G. Woodhouse when Bertie Wooster came to Bombay. What was his
[Guest]: name? Batty Baba. His name was Batty Baba. He had a male servant called G1. And yeah, that I mean,
[Guest]: it was only about like how much fills a page 1500-2000 words. But it was a full lovely P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse story. And then I did Who is Bill Bryson? And I did obviously, Bridget Jones. And
[Guest]: Jones. And yeah, I did like about 10 or 12 of those, which I am very, very pleased with myself
[Amit Varma]: for having done. You also did a column you mentioned earlier about, you know, where you
[Guest]: wrote about what happened 100 years back today. Right. So that was not something I wrote. The
[Guest]: Times of India has archives. And that was one of the extra money assignments I did back in my
[Guest]: first, those three years I did in the Times when I was freelancing. And Daryl knew that, you know,
[Guest]: I'm looking for a raise all the time. And he said, Do you want to do this? I said, Yeah. So every day
[Guest]: we used to have, my brief was find something in the past that resonates with the present. So I
[Guest]: would just go in and read the old newspapers and pull out something from there. And it was amazing
[Guest]: about how, as I was telling you, you know, people were complaining about traffic in Bombay in the
[Guest]: 19th century. And of course, at that time, it was more probably about, I mean, more about the
[Guest]: horse carts and the poo on the streets or whatever. But you know, floods and pollution, all
[Guest]: the things that we talk about were happening 100 years ago. And even advertisements were very, very
[Guest]: interesting to see. So I love that. The only problem was that the Times, I don't know now, now
[Guest]: I think they're all online, but they had everything on microfilm. And microfilm, I am not good with
[Guest]: motion. So you know, like, I used to get seasick after a while. And that was, yeah, I did that for
[Guest]: a few years as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that sounds quite fascinating. And something that I've sort of thought about doing as well,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, I thought I'll sort of have a podcast where every day I talk about something
[Amit Varma]: that happened that day, in the past, but not in a this day, that year, kind of boring, banal way,
[Amit Varma]: but kind of dig a little deeper, meaningful, and, you know, maybe someday. I'm struck by what you
[Amit Varma]: said about how you enjoy reading old pieces by yourself. And in my case, it's really just the
[Amit Varma]: opposite. And in fact, most writers I know, will often, you know, lament how whenever we read
[Amit Varma]: something from our past, we cringe so much.
[Guest]: I'm not saying I don't have pieces that I cringe at. Of course I do. Of course, especially my
[Guest]: first Sunday midday column, when I read those, like, parts of them, parts of it will be good,
[Guest]: but parts of it will be cringe, cringe, cringe. But then I think I developed like some kind of
[Guest]: sophistication fairly soon after that, because I don't cringe at a lot of stuff. And those parody
[Guest]: ones, I don't know whether I'm just, you know, wearing my rose tinted glasses or what, but I
[Guest]: think they're pretty okay.
[Amit Varma]: And how did your writing style when you look back on it, how did it evolve? And what was
[Amit Varma]: your thinking at the time as it evolved about sort of the craft of it, because a lot of your
[Amit Varma]: writing would be in service of something or the other, you're telling someone's story, or whatever
[Amit Varma]: is not meant to be noticed, but some of it, it would be okay to be self indulgent, like in the
[Guest]: columns and all of that. So what was your thinking about the craft through all of this time?
[Guest]: That's, it's nice to be asked that. I think when I started, I was like,
[Guest]: kind of parading the glory of the words. But I don't think that's true anymore. I like to get
[Guest]: the message across very simply, you know, that's my focus. I have a message and I want to convey it.
[Guest]: I want to use words that will be very simple so that anyone can read them and understand them.
[Guest]: But I also want to use words which have a certain weight, which anyone will read and admire. And
[Guest]: that's, I think, the focus. I mean, I don't want to use too many words. If I use a word just for
[Guest]: fun, sometimes, I mean, sometimes, you know, something special comes out, I may or may not
[Guest]: allow myself to keep it. Because it may be just taking away from the message, or it may be just
[Guest]: frivolous. But yeah, it's okay. Sometimes I allow myself to do that, because that's who I am. So
[Amit Varma]: it's okay. So, you know, before we go into a break, I just want to also ask you to double
[Amit Varma]: click on something that you mentioned a couple of minutes back about how much you enjoy child
[Amit Varma]: rearing, whether or not your kids might have. So that's not something I actually hear so much from
[Amit Varma]: mothers, you know, a lot of the traditional literature about it is how it's so much worse
[Guest]: than we expected. And it's just horrible. Yeah, I also hear that. And I feel, you know,
[Guest]: I also used, I remember other mothers saying, Oh, no, the summer holidays are coming. I don't
[Guest]: know what I'm going to do. So I guess I'm just this N2 cutlet kind of person. So whatever I get
[Guest]: to do, I just like to enjoy doing it. And I did that with my kids. And I really had a good time.
[Guest]: So we used to, I used to do things like we'd watch movies together, we'd watch all the,
[Guest]: you know, in those days, what was it like My Fair Lady and the King and I and, you know,
[Guest]: Disney movies of those days, Snow White and all that. It was like a compulsory Saturday after
[Guest]: lunch, because during the week, it was school. And there wasn't, while they were at school,
[Guest]: I could write. In the evenings, there would be homework. And of course, we live in a really nice
[Guest]: place where they can go out and play. And, you know, there were other kids and stuff. And I
[Guest]: enjoyed doing things with them, making things along with them. They were they were so good at
[Guest]: art. My kids were artists. I mean, my son is just amazing when he was a child. I mean, it's an
[Guest]: inherited skill because his dad was also an artist before he was hit on the head by his art teacher,
[Guest]: which is a separate story. His grandfather's an artist. He worked in the Delhi cloth mills as a
[Guest]: designer. So he has that gene. And all of them, I mean, we would do art stuff together, which is how
[Guest]: I had the guts to realize that anyone can do it. And I started doing it myself, but much later when
[Guest]: they had stopped doing it. And then, you know, it was just a lot of fun. I don't know, I never,
[Guest]: ever felt. So I was putting aside who I am, actually, at that time. I know, recently, I
[Guest]: sat down and thought about who would I have been if I didn't have children. I realized I would have
[Guest]: been probably the same same kind of person that I am now. But I would have been probably far more
[Guest]: ahead in my career in many ways. I would have had a different career. I would definitely not have
[Guest]: been doing the Sindhi documentation. I would have been an interpreter of Russian. And that would
[Guest]: have been my life. I don't know where I'd have been living and who my family would have been.
[Guest]: But yeah, I did study Russian briefly. And I did a few assignments. And I was extremely good though
[Guest]: my language skill is not that good. But because I'm able to communicate and of course, a language
[Guest]: skill would have improved. But that communication, obviously, I mean, you know, I used to hear from
[Guest]: others that that client of yours is still asking for you 10 years later. So you know, that's
[Guest]: obviously very flattering. I can't speak any Russian. I can say доброе утро and до свидания,
[Amit Varma]: but that's about it. How do you say the seen and the unseen in Russian?
[Guest]: I don't remember. I know, I'll find out. It's not that hard. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And that's actually a fascinating question. I wish I'd asked you, but you asked yourself that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how would your that counterfactual about had you not been a mother, what would you?
[Guest]: Yeah, so again, I think I needed to have a family basically, because I was emotionally,
[Guest]: you know, when I was very, very young, I realized how important a family is,
[Guest]: you know, because I was in boarding school, which was actually not a
[Guest]: happy place with an institution. And that's why I invested so much in my,
[Guest]: in my family. And I also feel, you know, sometimes when people talk about what was your
[Guest]: what's your biggest achievement been? So I'm going to ask myself that question again,
[Guest]: if you don't mind, which is, it's again, like, I'm really showing off my biggest achievements were
[Guest]: a that when the school bus came in, I was always there. And I was always cheerful and always had
[Guest]: something happy to say and do and whatever. And, you know, cheer up somebody who's not that happy
[Guest]: or listen to whatever had happened during the day and all that. And the second one is that I was
[Guest]: there with my parents with both of them the last years of their lives. And I was there with both
[Guest]: of them when they died. I mean, I was there at the moment of death received the final blessing.
[Guest]: I mean, there's nothing in this world that can compare with that. I think I'm the luckiest person
[Guest]: to have had that. I mean, it's something that everybody doesn't get. And I think I'm extremely,
[Guest]: extremely fortunate. That's been the best thing that ever happened to me.
[Amit Varma]: And when you mentioned, you know, always smiling when you're dropping your kids off at the school
[Amit Varma]: bus and all of that. And it strikes me that through much of our lives, when other people
[Amit Varma]: are involved, there's the effort of maintaining a persona, that this is how you must appear to
[Amit Varma]: your kids because other they'll feel this way extra layer. This is how, you know, you must
[Amit Varma]: appear to your husband, perhaps, or, you know, every relationship that we have, can often involve
[Amit Varma]: the construction of a persona, and you're maintaining it, and there's a lot of effort there.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, on a separate track, you know, we'll often go through lives with the anxiety of how do we fit
[Amit Varma]: into this world? Or how do we belong? Or what do other people think of us and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: So through your life, what was the process of kind of becoming comfortable in your own skin?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, sitting across you right now, it just feels that you are comfortable in your own skin.
[Amit Varma]: You're like, chill, right? So how did you get here?
[Guest]: So before I answer that, I want to tell you, I'm not, I was not always smiling with my kids.
[Guest]: There were a lot of times when I was yelling and tearing my hair.
[Amit Varma]: You're just saying this because you know, they might listen.
[Guest]: Well, I doubt any of them would really bother if you want to know the truth.
[Guest]: It's a long podcast. So the truth is, I don't know how they saw me.
[Guest]: But I do remember once when we did some kind of a process thing,
[Guest]: where you have to define yourself as either blue or orange or green or something.
[Guest]: And each of those colors means something else. And in my mind, I'm a blue.
[Guest]: And I remember two of my kids saw me as an orange, which meant very methodical, very particular.
[Guest]: You know, which I actually don't think I am, you know, but then obviously,
[Guest]: I was that for them, because I was getting them to do things in a certain way.
[Guest]: And, you know, bringing coming from boarding school discipline, obviously,
[Guest]: that must have been part of my, I don't know, actually, I need to sit down,
[Guest]: talk to them and find out exactly how it went. You know, now we are at a stage
[Guest]: when we can talk to each other without too much of emotional baggage.
[Guest]: I think we can ask. I mean, I can ask them and they'll tell me, I think.
[Amit Varma]: What's a blue?
[Guest]: Blue is like somebody who's, you know, like, who's surrounded by lovely things and who's happy.
[Guest]: And yeah, that excellent. So get fitting into my skin.
[Guest]: I think it is something that keeps improving. You know, I don't know when it started,
[Guest]: but I know that I even between last week and this week, I'm more comfortable in my skin than I was.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it is a process. So I don't, I know, like, there were times when I was comfortable in my skin,
[Guest]: but there was still a lot of difference between the way I would talk to somebody
[Guest]: who I was trying to impress, and I would talk to somebody who I just want to get some work done from.
[Guest]: Now, it's not like that. I talk to everybody exactly the same way, because I don't care.
[Guest]: I know who I am.
[Amit Varma]: No, that that's refreshing, because I think many people don't.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think the first step to becoming comfortable in your own skin,
[Amit Varma]: it's just self-awareness where you're sort of, you know, you're not just doing things,
[Amit Varma]: you're kind of aware of why you're doing them and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And not many people have even that. And it feels to me that it's a really difficult process because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can be pretending to yourself even when you think you're not.
[Amit Varma]: So, you're so right, Amit, because I think we are pretending to ourselves all the time.
[Guest]: And if we don't acknowledge that, we're never going to move forward.
[Guest]: And as for being comfortable in your skin, I think the reason why I did feel that therapy
[Guest]: and various other things were important is to get to that point.
[Guest]: And I know that the day I say, yes, I'm there, that's the day that I'll have to start all over
[Guest]: again, because you have to know, it's like saying, my house is clean.
[Guest]: Yeah, your house is clean because you cleaned it yesterday, you know.
[Guest]: It's not something that, because the world keeps giving you things and when you're like,
[Guest]: if you're in my position where people read your byline and then you meet someone and say,
[Guest]: oh, are you that one? You know, you just become a bit more vain and more arrogant and, you know,
[Guest]: you don't want to do that, right?
[Guest]: So you have to be on guard all the time.
[Guest]: And I think for me, the biggest help has been Vipassana.
[Unknown]: Tell me a bit more about that.
[Amit Varma]: Vipassana?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in what ways has it helped you?
[Amit Varma]: See, I'll tell you the whole story, how it started and everything.
[Guest]: I learned, I heard about it through actually one of my most early therapists, which would
[Guest]: have been in the 80s, only mid 80s.
[Guest]: And when I heard about it, I knew this is my thing.
[Guest]: But I couldn't do it until I kept, it was always on my mind.
[Guest]: Whenever anyone spoke about it, I would listen.
[Guest]: And then when you have three kids and all, come on, you can't push off for 11 days.
[Guest]: So I was waiting.
[Guest]: When my son was, he was the youngest, when he was in the 12th, when he entered the 12th,
[Guest]: I looked at the Vipassana, they're very organized.
[Guest]: It's a global thing.
[Guest]: It started in India, actually came out of Burma, started in India.
[Guest]: And now it's all over the world.
[Guest]: And they publish their schedules online.
[Guest]: I think it's vipassana.org.
[Guest]: So on, when my son entered the 12th, I looked at the calendar and I could see all the dates
[Guest]: when they had the courses.
[Guest]: And I wanted to do it at Igatpuri, which is the biggest center.
[Guest]: And then, you know, you don't want to do it when there's somebody's birthday or an anniversary
[Guest]: or some Diwali, this, that.
[Guest]: So I picked the dates in August that year.
[Guest]: And when they opened the booking, I booked on the first date and I made it.
[Guest]: I got, went and did it.
[Guest]: And it did have an impact on me.
[Guest]: But now, that was 18 years ago.
[Guest]: So I know that when I did it at that time, I was resisting so much.
[Guest]: I was just resisting, resisting.
[Guest]: I had this thing in my mind, which a lot of us have, which is that I'm so smart.
[Guest]: You have nothing to teach me, you know.
[Guest]: And that's the biggest trap anybody who is smart has, you know, until you realize that
[Guest]: you're not actually all that smart, please.
[Guest]: You know, you've got everything to learn.
[Guest]: So I didn't, I got a lot out of it because that was the year I started painting and I
[Guest]: had my first show that year.
[Guest]: So the first thing I'll tell you about the impact of Vipassana is it helps you to unleash
[Guest]: your creativity.
[Guest]: Second thing I realized when I did it recently, and it happened to me the last couple of times
[Guest]: I've done it, is that so you're supposed to be meditating and it's a guided meditation
[Guest]: and it's really very gentle and beautiful.
[Guest]: And it's really so, so simple.
[Guest]: And it's so, it's just about acknowledging reality, nothing else.
[Guest]: It's just about acknowledging reality.
[Guest]: That is what that meditation is.
[Guest]: You look at yourself, you look at your body.
[Guest]: What are the sensations you have on your body?
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: Just look at them.
[Guest]: Don't do anything else.
[Guest]: What I realized is that, so, you know, when you're doing that, obviously your mind wanders
[Guest]: and your mind is here and there.
[Guest]: And, you know, a lot of times I would be cooking food and, you know, arguing with somebody.
[Guest]: This time when I did it, it was all about creative ideas.
[Guest]: And the creative ideas are the most distracting, you know, because when you're having an argument
[Guest]: with somebody and you realize, hey, I'm in this course, I should be meditating, you bring
[Guest]: yourself back.
[Guest]: But when you have a creative idea, you're so grateful to your brain for giving you that
[Guest]: idea that you don't want to cut it short, you know.
[Guest]: So that is one of the things that happened.
[Guest]: But apart from that, I think it made me more, a little bit calmer, less, and that's what
[Guest]: one of my children said to me that now, you know, after I did the first time, she said,
[Guest]: like, you seem to be calmer.
[Guest]: So I don't think I was a very, very tempestuous person ever.
[Guest]: But yeah, probably that was true because she's very perceptive.
[Guest]: And I also feel that this business about being comfortable in your skin, it helps you a lot
[Guest]: with that, because it's about acknowledging reality.
[Guest]: So yeah, okay, this is what I am.
[Guest]: This is who I am.
[Guest]: And it's fine, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I did Vipashana once in Igatpuri, perhaps 18 years ago, who knows, who knows, it might
[Amit Varma]: even have been the same one.
[Guest]: And it was torture, it was torture, it was torture.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, I completely value, I completely, I completely get the value of mindfulness.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, at some point, we'll hopefully get back to mindfulness, meditation.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about the art that you do.
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that you did very kindly when you came here is you got some
[Amit Varma]: of your work and you said, please keep this and that'll, you know, leave the space open
[Amit Varma]: for me to create more of these.
[Amit Varma]: And so thank you for those gifts.
[Amit Varma]: But that gets me to wondering, that is then for you, the point of doing the art that you
[Amit Varma]: do, all about the process?
[Amit Varma]: It is not about a thing I've created, because you're perfectly happy even to give them away
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, not see much of it again.
[Amit Varma]: So is it all about the process of what it does to you to create that?
[Amit Varma]: Is that because for a lot of people, the point would be the art itself?
[Guest]: No, for me, the point is the art itself.
[Guest]: Because I get ideas, and then I want to see them implemented and I want to hang them on
[Guest]: the wall.
[Guest]: But I am just too prolific.
[Guest]: I have to give away my stuff.
[Amit Varma]: That's a lovely answer.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go in for a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And you can take me on a guided tour of Sindh on the other side.
[Guest]: Lovely.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Because she would always say she was so proud of being Sindhi, but there was nothing really
[Guest]: Sindhi about our home.
[Guest]: We lived far away from, you know, any Sindhi family or any family, even my dad's side.
[Guest]: No, we didn't.
[Guest]: We didn't have anyone near us.
[Guest]: We had, you know, very cosmopolitan kind of upbringing.
[Guest]: And also being Sindhi was not very glamorous.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not something that you wanted to be in those days, at least.
[Guest]: Yeah, and funnily enough, my grandparents and they were very different from the stereotypes
[Guest]: of Sindhis.
[Guest]: But so, you know, I mean, we were very accepting of them as they were.
[Guest]: They were really lovely people.
[Guest]: But somehow I even never thought of them as Sindhis, though they spoke Sindhi to each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: And of course, there was Sindhi food at home.
[Amit Varma]: One of your books where you speak about how your mother first started speaking about her
[Amit Varma]: childhood, you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: My mother never spoke about her childhood.
[Amit Varma]: I never noticed that she didn't.
[Amit Varma]: Which child imagines their mother as anything but a mother?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is such a sort of a lovely sentence with many layers to it.
[Amit Varma]: So through your life, what's that journey been like where you begin to sort of look
[Amit Varma]: at your parents as something other than the role that they play in your life, your parents,
[Amit Varma]: your grandparents, whatever for you?
[Amit Varma]: Did that start coming alive through their stories of the past, which was, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you know, tied up with Sindh and tied up with partition and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: So I think seeing my mother as a person, it probably was when she was much older.
[Guest]: It wasn't really about her Sindhi identity.
[Guest]: But when I realized, because my father was ill, he was diagnosed with Parkinson's when
[Guest]: he was only 50 years old.
[Guest]: And I think about 10 years later that he was not extremely disabled, but he was still
[Guest]: disabled, but he was disabled.
[Guest]: He needed support.
[Guest]: And one day I suddenly realized my mother 60 herself, you know, and can't be that easy
[Guest]: for her.
[Guest]: And that's when I realized that she's a person, you know, it's so otherwise I always
[Guest]: really took her for granted and, you know, resented so many things about her and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But being Sindhi, that was something that happened much, much later.
[Guest]: And now when I think about it, it happened at one point, it was turning point when the
[Guest]: Sindh story started unfolding and it became to me very, very fascinating.
[Guest]: But then when I look back, there were so many other things that had already laid the
[Guest]: ground for it, which gave me an advantage.
[Guest]: So it started with after my dad passed away.
[Guest]: Now, it wasn't that my dad was keeping her away from her Sindhi identity by any means,
[Guest]: because he would talk about being Sindhi.
[Guest]: He knew a few Sindhi words and, you know, they knew very clearly they were from different
[Guest]: places, but there was nothing about blocking the other one's identity out at all.
[Guest]: And after he died, she was suddenly after a long, long time without, she'd been looking
[Guest]: after him for a really long time.
[Guest]: That was kind of the thing that she did all day long.
[Guest]: Suddenly that wasn't there.
[Guest]: And also because, you know, she's, I didn't want her to feel like unwanted.
[Guest]: So, you know, I started taking her, you know, traveling with her and a lot of resistance,
[Guest]: but she would come along and then come back and tell everyone what a lovely time she had.
[Guest]: So I did that.
[Guest]: And then I told her that, you know, let's work, let's do this together.
[Guest]: I write books for everyone.
[Guest]: I mean, I write for all kinds of people.
[Guest]: Why don't you and I do this thing, which we'll do for the family?
[Guest]: And just about what was your life like in Sindh before partition, during partition,
[Guest]: after partition?
[Guest]: And nobody in the family knows anything about it.
[Guest]: So you just talk to me, tell me about it and we'll get photos, we'll put together whatever.
[Guest]: We didn't have photos.
[Guest]: None of us actually had photos, but I knew that if we ask around, her cousins might have.
[Guest]: And I thought we can put something together for the family.
[Guest]: So that's how it started.
[Guest]: And the thing is that she very spottingly started coming and sitting in front of me and talking.
[Guest]: And she remembered things that I just couldn't imagine.
[Guest]: I found them fascinating.
[Guest]: And then I realized this is too big a story.
[Guest]: It's never been done.
[Guest]: And I have to do more than just one person's story.
[Guest]: That's how it started.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of broad questions that I kind of want to double click on.
[Amit Varma]: I'd recorded an episode with the historian and economist Chinmay Tumbe, who wrote a book
[Amit Varma]: called India Moving about internal migrations.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the big DILs in that book for me was his point that most internal migration
[Amit Varma]: in India happens because of marriage, because a woman gets married and she goes away to
[Amit Varma]: wherever her husband's villages or wherever her husband is working and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that in a sense, there is a migration that women make, even if they
[Amit Varma]: don't shift to another physical location, even if they don't shift geography, they are
[Amit Varma]: shifting in a sense to another sense of self or another identity, which is bound within
[Amit Varma]: that marriage and within that notion or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So in your case, you pointed out that your dad never sort of constrained her from being
[Amit Varma]: Cindy or, you know, that side of her identity.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, it seems that she herself in some way would not have found a way to
[Amit Varma]: kind of express that or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then perhaps through her conversations with you, that's happening.
[Amit Varma]: What did you what were these like for her before I talk about what these were like for
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Guest]: What were these like for her?
[Guest]: What was what like for her?
[Amit Varma]: The memory, the going back.
[Guest]: Uh, so first of all, you know, since we were you were saying about how for both of them,
[Guest]: the thing is that they were living in a third place, right?
[Guest]: They were starting they were they had created their own lives.
[Guest]: And there were the constraints of the environment which they were in.
[Guest]: So my dad worked for a tea plantation company, which was Scottish.
[Guest]: It was he was one of the earliest Indian managers.
[Guest]: So the whole tradition was a very colonial kind of set up.
[Guest]: You know, the homes were built by the British for themselves.
[Guest]: And the staff was trained to cook their kind of food and to, you know, serve the colonial
[Guest]: masters.
[Guest]: So, you know, they had to kind of fit into that mold.
[Guest]: They actually did not have a language in common except English, because, you know, my father
[Guest]: spoke all the South Indian languages.
[Guest]: And his his language was Konkani and my mom didn't know any of them.
[Guest]: She learned some Tamil, very, very rudimentary Tamil, which was the language of the state
[Guest]: that I grew up in.
[Guest]: So it was largely English, not even they were neither of them were I mean, my dad's Hindi
[Guest]: was not bad, though he was from the South.
[Guest]: Mom's Hindi was OK.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, they were both not like really good Hindi speakers.
[Guest]: And for me, you know, that's always something which I've considered a lack that my Hindi
[Guest]: is very poor because I grew up in the South.
[Guest]: And but for her, recapturing her memories again, I realized after some weeks of, you
[Guest]: know, working in that space that it was very healing for her.
[Guest]: You know, she was talking about things that she'd left behind.
[Guest]: She one of the things she told me is that when I close my eyes, I can still see those
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: And I found that really moving.
[Guest]: I heard that same phrase from others also.
[Guest]: And honestly, I've said this before, but for me, I've done so many interviews with people
[Guest]: who describe things to me that I also when I close my eyes, I can see those places, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So I also feel as if I've seen them, though I never actually have.
[Guest]: She was 13 when partition took place, but there were certain details which she was able
[Guest]: to recount, which I was absolutely very impressed by because she had never spoken about them.
[Guest]: And there were things like she remembered the foods, she remembered certain, she remembered
[Guest]: some of my grandfather's high profile cases.
[Guest]: He was a lawyer.
[Guest]: And the thing she told me about those cases made me wonder about the history of Sindh.
[Guest]: And they made me very curious.
[Guest]: And I realized it's very, very interesting.
[Guest]: And we don't know and we should know.
[Guest]: Like when she described the way she grew up and the family structure, and it was so different
[Guest]: from what they had after partition because they were separated from the extended family.
[Guest]: And there were certain people who they were very, very, very close to, who they hardly
[Guest]: ever saw again after that.
[Guest]: Very different from what we grew up as.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, my brother and I, because it was only four of us and we'd be with the
[Guest]: grandparents for a few weeks.
[Guest]: And then all the aunts and uncles would also come.
[Guest]: There was no Sindh really there behind that at all because nobody was thinking about it.
[Guest]: I know one of my uncles, he would ask my grandfather, you know, he was born in February 1948.
[Guest]: So they were already in Bombay at that time.
[Guest]: And when he grew up, he would ask his dad to tell him about Sindh and his father would
[Guest]: say, no, there's nothing to tell.
[Guest]: It's all over.
[Guest]: Initially, I thought that, you know, people didn't want to talk about it because it was
[Guest]: too painful.
[Guest]: Now, I feel that, you know, it's so hard to talk about it because it's so big and it's
[Guest]: so complicated.
[Guest]: There's so much to tell.
[Guest]: Where will you start?
[Guest]: And I've had that experience of, you know, moving in.
[Guest]: And the first book I wrote, it was almost everything was told to me by my mom or the
[Guest]: people I interviewed.
[Guest]: You know, when I was reading stuff, I would pull out things to use in the book, which
[Guest]: were either, which would support or go against what was written in the book.
[Guest]: So it was just to show a different point of view or, you know, to give some kind of context.
[Guest]: Apart from that, as time went on, I realized there was so much more and it keeps unfolding.
[Guest]: New things keep coming up.
[Guest]: And I feel that I haven't got there yet, you know, even though it's been 10 years.
[Guest]: And though, honestly, I mean, I would love to keep interviewing people, but I realize
[Guest]: it's so much of heterogeneity.
[Guest]: There's so many different things.
[Guest]: It's where will you start, really?
[Guest]: You know, if you're somebody who's come from there and you've lost it and you can't explain
[Guest]: it to somebody who doesn't know what it was.
[Guest]: You speak about your mother's memory and one of the memories I was struck by was of her
[Amit Varma]: sister, Bina, where she wrote, she died.
[Amit Varma]: She wrote in the book, quote, when Bina was a year old, she got smallpox and died soon
[Guest]: after on 31st March, 1947.
[Amit Varma]: Even now, when I close my eyes, I can see her face.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm struck by the memory of the date that she remembers a precise date.
[Amit Varma]: That is something which I just couldn't get over.
[Guest]: I mean, she was somebody whose mind was supporting her right to the end in that way.
[Guest]: And the fact that nobody ever would have on the third, she may have been remembering,
[Guest]: OK, today is 31st of March.
[Guest]: This is the day my sister died.
[Guest]: Nobody ever spoke of it.
[Guest]: And similarly, she said to me that we arrived in Bombay and it was the 14th of November.
[Guest]: I mean, those things were just extraordinary to me.
[Guest]: Who remembers a date like that?
[Guest]: I mean, why would you remember the date?
[Amit Varma]: And it also tells you that there's an interior life there which no one has a clue of.
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, no one would have known that on 31st March, she might be feeling a little
[Unknown]: melancholy.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also that interesting thing of how your memory of someone can often be frozen
[Amit Varma]: to what they were like the last time you saw them, which in the case of the sister would
[Guest]: have been one year old, who had she lived would, of course, have 70, 80, 90.
[Amit Varma]: But you remember her as a one year old.
[Amit Varma]: In the case of a relative who's died, for example, you could remember them as an old
[Amit Varma]: person, even though you might have spent your whole life with them and seen them much younger
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just, you know, the way that the memories formed and the things that you sort of choose
[Amit Varma]: to remember is really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And what was this process like for you to see this side of your mother where she's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all these layers are there.
[Amit Varma]: She's remembering these dates.
[Amit Varma]: She's missing people who are no more.
[Amit Varma]: All of this rich life, which you were never aware of and which most kids would probably
[Amit Varma]: not know about their parents.
[Guest]: You know, how did that affect your relationship?
[Guest]: First, first of all, it was that, I mean, for me, she was somebody I was interviewing,
[Guest]: you know, it was somebody whose story I was listening to.
[Guest]: And I wasn't really looking at her as my mother at that point.
[Guest]: I was just like being very conscious of somebody who's telling me things and some an elderly
[Guest]: person who had a life that they never spoken about before.
[Guest]: And it's all suddenly, you know, becoming clear that it's still alive inside them.
[Guest]: And I feel now that because she died soon after, she died about two years after that.
[Guest]: So, you know, it was, again, one of these things like when I think about it, I mean,
[Guest]: this might sound a bit naive, but I just feel that, you know, it happened at that time.
[Guest]: You know, the things that happened, they were like these stepping stones, which got me to
[Guest]: a point where I could do it like, you know, if you start with the fact that I can talk
[Guest]: to people and interview them and listen to them and write down what they're saying, and
[Guest]: then, you know, be, for example, that I lived with my Sindhi grandparents for three years,
[Guest]: even though I never thought about them as Sindhi, they were speaking to each other in
[Guest]: Sindhi.
[Guest]: And my grandfather was talking to me in English and my grandmother was talking to me in Hindi,
[Guest]: but they were talking to each other in Sindhi.
[Guest]: And it's not like they were having long, long conversations with each other.
[Guest]: But I still, because of that, I can understand Sindhi, you know, so that is a bit of an asset.
[Guest]: It's not a huge asset because it also makes me a bit of a fake Sindhi because I don't
[Guest]: speak Sindhi myself and I don't even call myself, I don't call myself a Sindhi.
[Guest]: Some people don't like that sometimes, you know, because people, when I'm writing about
[Guest]: them and I'm really writing about them with so much of regard, so much of appreciation,
[Guest]: you know, so they don't like it when I say I'm not a Sindhi.
[Guest]: But how can I say I'm Sindhi? Because I don't know the language.
[Guest]: OK, I can understand the language because I lived with my Sindhi grandparents.
[Guest]: Then I studied at Jai Hind College, which was really weird.
[Guest]: I mean, I should have been at Xavier's.
[Guest]: My dad should have insisted.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: I said, you know, I heard my, in school, my headmaster saying, oh, Jai Hind College is
[Guest]: really difficult to get into.
[Guest]: It's the best college in Bombay these days.
[Guest]: And I was like, OK, fine, I want to go to Jai Hind College.
[Guest]: And then we had this thing which I told you about where I was in the 11th standard and
[Guest]: we had to move to CBSE.
[Guest]: And my grandfather went and talked to, he took me along and we went to meet Principal
[Guest]: Khoop Chandani.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, they must have known each other or they must have been from the same
[Guest]: social circle or whatever back in Sindh.
[Guest]: So he asked for an appointment and he got an appointment and I went with him.
[Guest]: You know, this is something that happened to me when I was very vulnerable, very, when
[Guest]: I was like 15 years old, right?
[Guest]: And I didn't know what was going on.
[Guest]: But now it comes to me with so much clarity.
[Guest]: I was sitting next to my grandfather and this, you know, hoary old, not that old also, but
[Guest]: very stern and very powerful person in a white suit was sitting in front of us across the
[Guest]: big table.
[Guest]: And he started talking to me in Sindhi.
[Guest]: And I was like, uh, excuse me, you know, rolled my eyes or whatever like a teenager would
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And my grandfather was so apologetic.
[Guest]: He was so apologetic.
[Guest]: He was so ashamed of himself, not ashamed of me, but he was like, see, this is what
[Guest]: we've come to.
[Guest]: And they exchanged that look between them.
[Guest]: And I got admission in Jain College.
[Guest]: And it was like very boring.
[Guest]: You know, I was like science in Jain College in those days.
[Guest]: I don't know what it's like now, but it was like not that great three years.
[Guest]: Towards the end of it, it got a bit better.
[Guest]: I had my made friends and.
[Guest]: But so that was a stepping stone.
[Guest]: And then what else could I call a stepping stone?
[Guest]: I mean, the fact that, as I said, as a writer, you know, and then this whole thing of two
[Guest]: years, less than two years with my mom telling me about Sindh, which amazingly she remembered
[Guest]: so many details about.
[Guest]: So, you know, we were talking about reading what you wrote and cringing because when I
[Guest]: wrote that book, I didn't know anything.
[Guest]: And then I started reading, thinking, listening all the time, like not all the time, but a
[Guest]: lot of the time speaking about Sindh, reading about Sindh, listening, interviewing people.
[Guest]: And after a few years, when I had to think about reprinting that book, I knew I should
[Guest]: read it.
[Guest]: And I'm sure I'm going to find a lot of bloopers in it because, you know, I didn't know anything
[Guest]: when I started.
[Guest]: I must have said all kinds of, you know, naive and stupid things.
[Guest]: So then I read the whole thing and again, I was really shocked because, yeah, they may
[Guest]: have been naive, but they were not stupid.
[Guest]: There was nothing that really struck a wrong note.
[Guest]: And that was amazing.
[Guest]: How could that have happened?
[Guest]: I really didn't know anything.
[Guest]: It was just the base of what my mom gave me, you know.
[Guest]: So that's the backstory of that.
[Guest]: That book was written when I didn't know anything.
[Guest]: It's still working.
[Guest]: It's still selling.
[Guest]: Even today, people are still doing it for book club discussions.
[Guest]: And, you know, like recently I asked three people.
[Guest]: I sent them the link to my website, blackandwhitefountain.com.
[Guest]: And I said, listen, I'm coming to see you guys soon.
[Guest]: And which one of my books would you like?
[Guest]: And all three of them replied, Sindh Stories from a Vanished Homeland, though there are
[Guest]: lots of other books which are also quite fascinating.
[Guest]: I don't know, maybe the website promotes it the most or what.
[Guest]: But yeah, it's still alive after 10 years.
[Guest]: So that's quite gratifying.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I enjoyed about the book is that the voices sound so authentic.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, that it's, you've sort of been true to the voices in the book, your
[Amit Varma]: mother's voice and all the other Sindhi voices in there.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also struck by the word in the title Vanished, which I think one of your foreign
[Amit Varma]: publishers said, let's not call it Vanished.
[Guest]: And he called it Lost Homeland.
[Guest]: Oxford University Press in Pakistan, they did not want to use the word Vanished.
[Guest]: And what I understood is that Sindhi people in Pakistan, that is the majority community,
[Guest]: which did not obviously leave when Pakistan was, that was their country.
[Guest]: They also have had a raw deal after partition.
[Guest]: And they have felt colonized, they have felt, you know, rejected and made fun of.
[Guest]: And they are very sensitive and they lost their middle class.
[Guest]: So they miss their Hindus.
[Guest]: And there wasn't that much of a conflict between the Hindus and Muslims of Sindhi like
[Guest]: were one people.
[Guest]: For them, it was their language, their culture, their, you know, common beliefs.
[Guest]: So they said, we can't use the word Vanished or we'll be in trouble because they will
[Guest]: say, no, we haven't vanished, we are here.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking to myself, well, you're going to call it Lost, how is that going to
[Guest]: be any different?
[Guest]: They called it stories from a lost homeland, which maybe is not as dramatic as Vanished.
[Guest]: I didn't like that because I think Vanished is what I wanted to say.
[Guest]: And that was a very strong sense I got while interviewing my mother.
[Guest]: And I mentioned that in the book about how she tells me the name of the villages.
[Guest]: She said, my father's village was Kherodero.
[Guest]: And our family is married within these five villages.
[Guest]: And she was giving me the names of the villages and she named four of them.
[Guest]: And she couldn't remember the name of the fifth.
[Guest]: And she said, I'll tell you, I know it will come to me.
[Guest]: But while she was talking, I Googled and, you know, there was a whole list of names
[Guest]: that came up and I started saying them out to her.
[Guest]: And she was looking at me with this expression on her face, like, how would you know this,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: And I'm thinking like, you know, you look on a map and you'll see the name of a place.
[Guest]: And that's when I realized that there's no map, you know, you are 13 years old, you've
[Guest]: left this place that it was all you ever knew.
[Guest]: And then it's gone.
[Guest]: Everybody's talking about something else.
[Guest]: You know, you're never going to see, it's gone, it's vanished.
[Guest]: So you know, you're never going to have any contact with it.
[Guest]: That's why I use the word vanish, which I think is what happened with them.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to double click on that word now.
[Amit Varma]: I have a bunch of Sindhi friends who I've never thought of as Sindhi friends, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's in retrospect that I'm looking at the Bhatia's and the Melwani's and thinking, hey,
[Amit Varma]: but these are Sindhi friends.
[Amit Varma]: But not only have I never got a sense of Sindhiness from them, but I'm not even sure how much
[Unknown]: Sindhiness they ever felt themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And so my question is sort of that, in modern times, you know, what is the Sindhiness?
[Amit Varma]: Because when I look at othernesses, just to coin a word there, when I look at Bengaliness
[Amit Varma]: or Punjabiness or whatever, there is a land, there is Punjab, there is Bengal, there is
[Amit Varma]: a language, you know, Punjabi and Bengali, there is a literature, there is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so many distinctive, there are even stereotypes, but that of course, the Sindhis still have.
[Amit Varma]: But when you sort of think about Sindhis, you know, you've spoken in your writings about
[Amit Varma]: how so many people lose touch with the language, you may hear your grandparents speaking the
[Amit Varma]: language to each other, but do young Sindhis today communicate in Sindhi?
[Amit Varma]: No, because you have so many other languages that you need to know to get ahead in the
[Amit Varma]: world, the language of the local place where you are, perhaps English, because that's your
[Amit Varma]: global sort of language to get ahead, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that is vanishing or has vanished, that whatever being Sindhi meant,
[Guest]: whatever?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it was lost.
[Guest]: So partly, I think it's happened with everybody because of the way the world has changed because
[Guest]: of cosmopolitanization and media and, you know, it is true for everybody.
[Guest]: But you do find a lot and of course, because of the mixed marriages where people don't
[Guest]: know each other's language, the language the other person grew up hearing at home.
[Guest]: So those are the most common reasons for it to happen.
[Guest]: But for most people, there's still a place they can go back to where that language is
[Guest]: spoken, where they can connect with it.
[Guest]: And Sindhis definitely don't have that, Indian Sindhis don't have that.
[Guest]: If you are lucky enough, as I was, to visit, it's a tremendous experience.
[Guest]: I mean, what for me, which is something that came to me when I was giving an interview
[Guest]: while in Sindh, it was after having, you know, connected with people, experiencing something
[Guest]: that I hadn't imagined.
[Guest]: First of all, being in a room full of people who speak exactly like my uncles, I mean,
[Guest]: come on, you know, that was something and the same quality of affection of wanting to
[Guest]: make sure that you've eaten enough, you know, giving kharchi to your children.
[Guest]: So I said it, it was like looking into the mirror for the first time, because that's
[Guest]: what it felt like to me.
[Guest]: And that's gone, right?
[Guest]: You don't get that.
[Guest]: You can't have that.
[Guest]: It's like it's one of it's a very rare Naniya kind of experience.
[Guest]: I think identity is like a very complex thing in any case.
[Guest]: I think now, you know, because, see, the partition, the migrant generation did not realize, right,
[Guest]: that it was something to hold on to.
[Guest]: They didn't realize what a precious thing was being lost.
[Guest]: So they let it go because they had other priorities.
[Guest]: The next generation, similarly.
[Guest]: Now, the generation, like maybe the fourth generation, they want to know, they do want
[Guest]: to know, they want to reconnect and they're doing it.
[Guest]: Many of them are looking back and trying to find out.
[Guest]: But, you know, one thing which like I feel a little uncomfortable about is that people
[Guest]: whining about, oh, they suffered so much.
[Guest]: Now, come on, suffered so much is not such a big deal, yeah, because life is full of
[Guest]: suffering anyway.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, Buddha told us that long back, right?
[Guest]: So suffering is not the point.
[Guest]: The point is, how did you cope with it?
[Guest]: And that is something which I feel we need to salute.
[Guest]: The way they did it in, as one, and, you know, as I said, it's a very heterogeneous community.
[Guest]: They do everything differently and they're always quarreling and everybody wants to be
[Guest]: in the forefront.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's a lot of that.
[Guest]: These are, again, I'm being, you know, using stereotypes, which is not fair, but I mean,
[Guest]: you know, I'm saying this because I want to say that when it came to partition, they behaved
[Guest]: as one.
[Guest]: First of all, they left without looking back, second, they landed where they were and they
[Guest]: got going.
[Guest]: They did not complain.
[Guest]: Those are the things that we need to salute them for.
[Guest]: That's what I think.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Then after that, there was this loss, which happened in an organic way.
[Guest]: Like when the parents were talking to each other, they would talk to the children in
[Guest]: another language, which, like I realized recently, they had to do because who's going to explain
[Guest]: everything to them?
[Guest]: They're not going to understand, right?
[Guest]: So fine, let them get the context of where we are now.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting how you speak about how they all left and they all kind of came to terms
[Amit Varma]: with it and went on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this fascinating little bit in your book where you speak about this survey
[Amit Varma]: that was carried out in the late 1940s by a psychologist called V. K. Kothurkar to understand,
[Amit Varma]: you know, stereotype notions that Pune people held about non-Maharashtrian groups.
[Amit Varma]: And the survey was also distributed to Sindhi people who were not keen to take part, but
[Amit Varma]: who left comments.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those comments read as follows, quote, and this is by a Sindhi in that time,
[Amit Varma]: quote, those who are interested in collecting these statistics should know that we are no
[Amit Varma]: more divided in sections like Muslims, Sindhis, Punjabis, Bengalis, etc., as contemplated
[Amit Varma]: by them.
[Amit Varma]: Let them understand that we are Indians only.
[Amit Varma]: And as an Indian, I apply all the good adjectives to all my countrymen and let the remaining
[Amit Varma]: adjectives be applied to those who are interested in dividing us again by such methods, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And is this part of a necessary process where, you know, it's partly perhaps being in denial
[Amit Varma]: of what just happened, and it's partly something that you feel necessary to assimilate in this
[Amit Varma]: country and you have left your home and you've come here in that sense coming to India, you
[Amit Varma]: know, like the phrase you mentioned earlier, they have come to India.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, where is this feeling sort of coming from that we, you know, that the past
[Guest]: is past and we have to make it vanish as it were?
[Guest]: Yeah, the two options that you gave are definitely valid.
[Guest]: But my sense is that it came from something a little older, which goes back to the freedom
[Guest]: movement, and which is something which was very, very strong across the country at that
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: It was very, very strong in Sindh.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of resistance to the British, huge, you know, so many, I mean, I have a
[Guest]: lot of stories of the things that people did, and not just the men, the women and the children
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: And I think that feeling, whatever he was expressing, when I read it, that's what it
[Guest]: meant to me that he's talking about what he felt when India was becoming independent.
[Guest]: And that's the way that's what should have been retained.
[Guest]: And if it wasn't retained, there were too many reasons for it not being retained.
[Guest]: But it's such a lovely thing.
[Guest]: I would not really be cynical and think that or even, you know, whatever, I would not really
[Guest]: think it was because they were assimilating or I think it was because that's what they
[Guest]: really felt back then.
[Guest]: If you look at the number of Sindhi businesses, which have, which was started soon after partition,
[Guest]: which have the words like Jai Hind and national and, you know, things like that, it tells
[Guest]: you that that's what they still had in their minds, you know, that they did, that's what
[Amit Varma]: they believed.
[Amit Varma]: Is a flip side to that, the fact that they were sort of almost pushed into such nationalism
[Guest]: by being forced to leave?
[Guest]: I think they had that before, before independence.
[Guest]: I think that that was the spirit of the fight for independence.
[Amit Varma]: So just as you know, you spoke about the vanished Sindh, is the flip side of that the rediscovery
[Amit Varma]: of it?
[Amit Varma]: Because in a sense, if that Sindh that vanished for your mother and people of her generation,
[Amit Varma]: it was rediscovered by you in a manner of speaking and perhaps by others.
[Guest]: Yeah, there were a few others.
[Guest]: There were like some of us and some obviously who started before me, who started these major
[Guest]: excavations and it's still going on.
[Guest]: And it's extremely complicated because, you know, you come up with something and you don't
[Guest]: know exactly what it means.
[Guest]: And you have a certain context in which you have to interpret it.
[Guest]: And then something else comes up and it unsettles what you thought at first.
[Guest]: And you know, it's this archaeological process, right?
[Guest]: And it is still carrying on.
[Guest]: And it gets more and more complicated as you go along because times keep changing.
[Guest]: And that's why, you know, I like I read this somewhere and I put it into the starting quote
[Guest]: of something I wrote some like a few weeks ago about how hard it is to restore a lost
[Guest]: legacy.
[Guest]: It's by Hartley, a British novelist whose novels I never read, but I came across this
[Guest]: quote, which says, the past is a foreign country, they do things differently there.
[Guest]: You know, from today's context, you see things and you take certain things for granted.
[Guest]: And unless you're really alert, you won't know that that's not the way it was back then.
[Guest]: Everything was different.
[Guest]: I mean, you talk about traveling in a train, the trains were different.
[Guest]: You talk about drinking water at a railway station.
[Guest]: In Sindh, in the 1940s, they served water separately, different water for Muslims and
[Guest]: different water for Hindus.
[Guest]: So you know, things like that, you just have to keep collecting those pieces and then put
[Guest]: them together, which is, as you said, rediscovering the vanished.
[Guest]: Again, there will be parts of it, which is assumption, there'll be parts of it, which
[Guest]: is influenced by your own political beliefs, or, you know, I am actually very conscious,
[Guest]: I don't know whether I should say this, but it's the truth.
[Guest]: So why not?
[Guest]: Actually, I feel conscious of the fact that when I write, in a way, it's propaganda.
[Guest]: And I feel, you know, I'm not somebody with a proper liberal arts humanities kind of education.
[Guest]: But I've had certain experiences, which have conveyed such huge lessons to me, like this
[Guest]: thing that happened to me when I went to Russia for the first time.
[Guest]: And I wasn't a child, I was 23 years old, there was a group of us who were taken as
[Guest]: guests of the Russian government, about 12 or 13 of us from different parts of India.
[Guest]: And they used to do this every couple of years that they would invite people who were either
[Guest]: working for one of their institutes, or, you know, students who'd done well, which was,
[Guest]: which is what, how I was included.
[Guest]: And they took us, we had to just get to Delhi, and then they flew us to Tashkent, we had
[Guest]: a few days there, that time that was the USSR, so Tashkent and Samarkand, and then Moscow.
[Guest]: And it was so exciting to be in Moscow and, you know, being able to communicate in a very
[Guest]: broken way with people.
[Guest]: But what the experience that I had was being so shocked that there were no spies anywhere.
[Guest]: Because for us, as people who grew up with the influence of the American media, Russian
[Guest]: meant spy.
[Guest]: And no matter what you were reading, I'm not just talking about time in life, I'm talking
[Guest]: about James Hadley Chase, and Frederick Forsyth, and even Mad Magazine, anything you read,
[Guest]: if it was Russian, it was a spy.
[Guest]: And here I was in Russia, there were no spies.
[Amit Varma]: How do you know there were no spies?
[Amit Varma]: Everybody could have been a spy.
[Guest]: You know, you have to be wearing that shuffle coat and all.
[Guest]: But what I meant to say is that they were ordinary people, there was no secret service
[Guest]: following us.
[Guest]: They were just like people, and you know, somebody will like send you flowers, and you're
[Guest]: sitting and having lunch, and somebody will send you a bottle of champagne, and say, Oh,
[Guest]: you're from India, and they start singing.
[Guest]: And I met really innocent people, you know, really like somebody who she said she'd seen
[Guest]: the movie Disco Dancer 41 times, and she wanted to marry Mithun Chakravarty.
[Guest]: And she asked me if I'd carry a letter back to India for him.
[Guest]: I carried the letter, I don't know whether he ever replied to her, but I did make sure
[Amit Varma]: that he got the letter.
[Amit Varma]: How did you make sure he got the letter?
[Guest]: I knew where he lived.
[Guest]: I had a friend who lived in the same building.
[Guest]: So she dropped it off at his place in Bandra.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's okay.
[Guest]: I didn't expect this story to kind of land up with a letter to Mithun Chakravarty.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, that's something which made me realize what propaganda is, you just
[Guest]: keep saying something, you know, nicely to people, and eventually, you've got them.
[Amit Varma]: Why did you refer to your own writing as propaganda?
[Guest]: So I might be being a little harsh, you know, but I am telling the stories that I hear.
[Guest]: So it's, you know, I'm not writing about, okay, let's look at the bell curve.
[Guest]: Let's look at, let's look at the characteristics of human behavior.
[Guest]: And you know, where do you see, when you talk about Sindhi, which are the things that you're
[Guest]: talking about?
[Guest]: You're talking about, if you're being kind, you're talking about being hardworking, and
[Guest]: you're talking about being entrepreneurial, you're talking about being innovative, maybe,
[Guest]: maybe not innovative, even.
[Guest]: But if you're not, then you're talking about being shrewd, you're talking about being exploitative.
[Guest]: That's what I meant.
[Guest]: So if I'm only talking, if I'm leaving out the exploitation stories, and I'm only telling
[Guest]: you about stories where, I mean, these are completely true stories, I'm not twisting
[Guest]: them in any way.
[Guest]: I'm just telling you stuff that actually happened.
[Guest]: I don't know, Amitabh, I mean, you know, I'm not, like I said, it's a bell curve, but I'm
[Guest]: giving you these stories.
[Guest]: And I want, I want things that haven't been told before to come out.
[Guest]: And I have a, you know, for a proper sense of what actually happened, there's so much
[Guest]: stuff that's still not known.
[Amit Varma]: So I look at a set of movements of revival in India, and I can see what say, Rekhta is
[Amit Varma]: doing for Urdu slash Hindustani, or there is, you know, a recent guest on the show when
[Amit Varma]: a single he has a site called stage, which provides OTT content in dialects like Haryanvi
[Amit Varma]: and Rajasthani and, and which is really interesting, because that is fighting against the social
[Amit Varma]: impulse to homogenize, you know, urbanization, going to cities, homogenization, that's what
[Amit Varma]: you typically imagine, you know, is a movement in modern times.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore you think, hey, dialects are going to disappear, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But what Vinay is doing with stage movement in the opposite direction, where there's a
[Amit Varma]: massive industry built and people who grow up speaking those dialects, now don't feel
[Amit Varma]: ashamed of themselves, you know, they feel empowered.
[Amit Varma]: In a similar sense, I wonder if, you know, there is perhaps, you know, the possibility
[Amit Varma]: of some kind of Sindhi revivalism in that sense, like, do you see it happening?
[Guest]: And would it even be desirable if it were to happen, like, is there value in it?
[Guest]: So you know, I do feel that in the past, there were attempts made, but probably the methods
[Guest]: of communication were not that effective, you know.
[Guest]: And also, like, I remember this one time when I visited my, my mum and I, and another one
[Guest]: of her brothers went to visit the younger brother, I mean, so there were four of us,
[Guest]: my mum and two of her brothers.
[Guest]: And the one whose home we were in, he just came back.
[Guest]: And he said, yeah, I told my friends that I have to go because my sister and my niece
[Guest]: are coming from Pune, and my niece has just written a book about Sindhis.
[Guest]: And they said, oh, is it a funny book?
[Guest]: So my, my mum and the other one, the other brother, my uncle, both of them are so annoyed,
[Guest]: what do you mean funny?
[Guest]: And he said, yeah, what can I do?
[Guest]: That's the way they think.
[Guest]: So he was just pulling their leg because he knew what was going to happen, right?
[Guest]: And they were both like, but I'm proud to be Sindhi.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it's very sweet.
[Guest]: But if you go around telling people, I'm proud to be Sindhi, they'd be like, okay, good for
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: You know, instead of that, if you tell them some stories about actual facts, they can
[Guest]: really move you because they're true, and they were amazing.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm doing.
[Guest]: And yeah, I don't know, I suppose it's a revival, but there's a revival of some other things
[Guest]: also, which are, I don't want to be a part of that, you know, which is taking you into
[Guest]: being fanatic about your religion or anything like that, you know, I don't think that's
[Guest]: my story in any way.
[Guest]: I know that one of the things my mum told me about, which I would never have known,
[Guest]: none of us would ever have known.
[Guest]: She said when the trouble started after partition, it was fairly okay before.
[Guest]: There was not that there wasn't trouble before, but after when things started getting uncomfortable,
[Guest]: there was a lot of anxiety and they knew that something was going on and they had to leave.
[Guest]: She said the first thing we did was we tore down these big, we had these huge, big pictures.
[Guest]: As soon as you entered our house, we had these two huge big pictures and we tore them, pull
[Guest]: them out, tore them out of their frames and tore them up.
[Guest]: And who were they?
[Guest]: Shivaji and Maharana Pratap Singh.
[Guest]: So you know, they definitely had an influence.
[Guest]: So these were not Sindhi heroes.
[Guest]: These were heroes that were necessary according to them for the Hindus to feel that they were,
[Guest]: you know, they had a certain valor or whatever.
[Guest]: And they came from RSS.
[Guest]: They came from the RSS, which had entered Sindh in the 40s and which was, there were
[Guest]: shakhas all over and my mum and her and two of her brothers, I mean, the others were younger,
[Guest]: so they weren't part of it, but they would go to the shakha and it was a social thing
[Guest]: for them.
[Guest]: It's not like they were taught you have to kill everybody or you have to, you know, be
[Guest]: a, I mean, they were not taught, as far as I can tell, they were not taught to do anything
[Guest]: bad.
[Guest]: They were told, this is what they've told me, that we were taught to be proud of ourselves
[Guest]: and if you're ever attacked, you should know how to defend yourself.
[Guest]: And these are our great heroes.
[Guest]: So I don't want to be like, you know, if you're talking about revival, again, you go back
[Guest]: to, you can go back to Mohenjodaro because there is a connection there geographically
[Guest]: and also in terms of things like trade, you know, their trade was happening back then
[Guest]: and they were like really very, very, very skilled at, you know, they knew what was,
[Guest]: what they had, which somebody else wanted a thousand miles away.
[Guest]: So that's something which the Siddhis always did and they still do.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Amardeep Singh a couple of years back and he's a scholar who's retraced
[Guest]: the path of Guru Nanak through.
[Guest]: He's amazing, amazing, the work he's done.
[Amit Varma]: Through the subcontinent and one of the TILs that I had while, you know, reading his books
[Amit Varma]: and recording with him is that there was something that you can call Nanak Panti, which was much
[Amit Varma]: broader than Sikhism, that Nanak was actually worshipped all over the South Asia and even
[Amit Varma]: beyond by people who weren't Sikhs.
[Amit Varma]: And the example he gave is from Sindh and that's an example you give as well when, you
[Amit Varma]: know, your mother speaks about how the only religious picture they had in their home was
[Amit Varma]: of Guru Nanak and, you know, their prayers every morning were the Sukhmani and the Japsahib
[Amit Varma]: from the Guru Granth Sahib and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And so there's a lot about this Nanak Panti there.
[Amit Varma]: There are parts where you've also spoken about how you are happily taking influences from
[Amit Varma]: Islam as well, like you interviewed a lady called Aruna Jaitwani and she's got a story
[Amit Varma]: about how when they were coming through partition, one she distinctly remembers the dresses she
[Amit Varma]: wore, which is again an incredible memory.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, they had a black tin trunk with them and when they came to the railway station
[Amit Varma]: in Hyderabad, and this is of course Hyderabad Sindh, it was crowded and everybody who was
[Amit Varma]: travelling by that train had been robbed and all their belongings were taken and all of
[Amit Varma]: that and a tall hefty Pathan came and opened this trunk and there was a photograph there
[Amit Varma]: of Syed Malik, who was a Muslim Pir right on top.
[Amit Varma]: So he just offered a prayer, closed the trunk and made sure that nobody looted anything
[Amit Varma]: from it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when I'm reading about before that period, before the RSS came in, from the accounts
[Amit Varma]: in your books, one gets a sense that it's very dynamic, it's very syncretic.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Nanak Panti is a big thing, Nanak is a big thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you'll have Muslim Pirs show up in this kind of way as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you'll have Hindu influences as well.
[Amit Varma]: It's a beautiful mix, a beautiful Khechri and you know, which seems, you know, far removed
[Amit Varma]: from the polarizing impulses of modern times.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what sense you got of that from speaking to, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: of that generation and then later you of course studied the history of that, of you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the way from Mohenjodaro onwards.
[Guest]: I haven't studied actually all that much.
[Guest]: But I'll just tell you the thing that I remembered my grandfather saying, which I, you know,
[Guest]: was that in sin there was no difference between Hindus and Muslims.
[Guest]: Now when I was like in college and I heard him say that, I just assumed that he's saying
[Guest]: that because he was a liberal thinker.
[Guest]: And you know, maybe that's what he was.
[Guest]: But then later on now, I realized that he was saying it because that's the way it was.
[Guest]: And they did have common beliefs, they did have common places of worship.
[Guest]: And yeah, many Hindu families had Muslim peers who they totally believed in, who, from whom
[Guest]: they got their spiritual comfort.
[Guest]: And they still have, they still, some of them still do, they still, there are still in Bombay
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: Of course, their following is much reduced, but they still have, like I know somebody
[Guest]: who has the gaddhi of a Muslim peer in Khilaba, and then there was somebody in Sayan, there's
[Guest]: somebody in Ghatkopar, and so many of them actually brought their, you know, they brought
[Guest]: the gaddhi with them, then they set up all over again.
[Guest]: And those were not necessarily Muslim, but they were, you know, actually, I'm so confused
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: They were probably Sufi, most of them probably were.
[Guest]: When it comes to Nanak, I really think that that was the majority.
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: That's my sense.
[Guest]: Now, again, it could be warped data, because I'm talking about the people who I've interviewed,
[Guest]: and there are so many more that I have, and there are huge pockets that I haven't touched
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: But Jhulelal was definitely, you know, a figure, mythological figure in Sindh, much revered,
[Guest]: became an icon of Sindhism after partition, not was not, you know, because there's no
[Guest]: other community that has a Jhulelal.
[Guest]: I think, yeah, maybe in Rajasthan, there are, you know, there are communities who would
[Guest]: also revere Jhulelal.
[Guest]: But Jhulelal was brought out after partition by Ram Panjwani, who was a professor of Sindhi
[Guest]: at Jain College.
[Guest]: And he used to travel after partition, on his own money, he would travel to the camps
[Guest]: just to sing and, you know, cheer up people.
[Guest]: And it was such a lovely thing, right?
[Guest]: And he would sing about it.
[Guest]: I heard this from Mohan Gihani, who is a poet.
[Guest]: And he told me that he would sing, he would play the matka, and he would sing Jhulelal,
[Guest]: Jhulelal, Jhulelal, and everybody would be clapping.
[Guest]: And then it just became a huge thing.
[Guest]: They were Nanak Panthis, almost everybody, including my mom, as you said.
[Guest]: She also said, if you remember, that after partition, all that stopped, nobody bothered
[Guest]: to tell us, you have to say it first before you have breakfast, because, you know, they
[Guest]: had other priorities.
[Guest]: So funny thing that I have come across while interviewing people, and it's happened so
[Guest]: often that it makes me laugh, they'll say, no, no, we were not Sikh, we were Hindu.
[Guest]: Okay, who did you, whose followings did you follow?
[Guest]: I mean, whose teachings did you follow?
[Guest]: Guru Nanak.
[Guest]: And, and the other gurus.
[Guest]: So then you're a Sikh.
[Guest]: No, no, no, we are Hindus.
[Guest]: So just like a couple of weeks ago, I was interviewing someone who's 97 and who's very
[Guest]: sharp still.
[Guest]: And he said to me that Guru Nanak is for Punjabis.
[Guest]: I don't know why we Sindhis were following him.
[Guest]: So actually, it's again, this whole polarization, political, you know, thing, which has, and
[Guest]: Sindhis still will have a Guru Nanak picture, they will still have, I mean, when my mom
[Guest]: died, I would not have known, I'd have done the normal, like Brahman, you know, ceremony,
[Guest]: which we did for my dad.
[Guest]: But I knew that when she, because she just told me about all this.
[Guest]: So we did her mark at the Gurdwara in Pune, you know, I wouldn't have known.
[Guest]: But but I think it's really important because that was one of the things that happened to
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: I realized that, you know, this was actually who she was.
[Guest]: I mean, we didn't have, we hadn't talked about it for a long time, but maybe it wasn't.
[Guest]: And she wasn't really, you know, a religious person, totally not into any kind of mumbo
[Guest]: jumbo, whatever, which is a nice thing, one of the nice things I inherited from her.
[Guest]: So we would have done something else.
[Guest]: And then we went to Gurdwara instead.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think the times have changed.
[Guest]: I don't know whether we'll ever go back to that, where what you are really looking for
[Guest]: is higher spiritual values.
[Guest]: You're looking for what is good and rich in life.
[Guest]: And it doesn't matter which source it's coming from, so long as it's a good and pious source.
[Guest]: And that's the way it was in Sindh, to my reading, you know.
[Guest]: And if you look at what there, there are poets of Sindh, you know, the kind of philosophy,
[Guest]: they all say this.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at what you have from Kabir, or what you have from Tukaram, it's
[Guest]: very similar, isn't it?
[Guest]: Where you're talking about humanity and you're talking about, it doesn't really matter what
[Guest]: the source is.
[Guest]: It's about who you are and what your life journey is.
[Guest]: And I think that's the way it was in Sindh.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I found, you know, after my episode with Amardeep, I just found Nanak
[Amit Varma]: so close to Kabir in so many ways, you know, as much of a, you know, freewheeling mistake
[Amit Varma]: as a founder of a religion, as people tend to.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a thought about identities.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we, of course, contain multitudes, right?
[Amit Varma]: So there are many aspects to us.
[Amit Varma]: And we can choose which of them to bring to the forefront or which of them to think of
[Amit Varma]: as our primary identity.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that there might well have been a situation, say, in a particular point
[Amit Varma]: of time, in a particular place, maybe if you're a Sindhi in, say, 1910, that Sindhi is a primary
[Amit Varma]: identity and the religion per se is not that big a deal.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you let other influences in and you are not dogmatic or hardcore about
[Amit Varma]: whatever religion you're supposedly born into, and they all meld into one another.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things in these modern globalized times is that one, I think these modern globalized
[Amit Varma]: times are great, by far a net positive, but one of the unintended effects is that some
[Amit Varma]: of these other smaller identities can get diluted down, like for a Sindhi person, that
[Amit Varma]: could be her Sindhiness.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, if you want something to hold on to, to feel that you're part of a community
[Amit Varma]: or to feel rooted, you might have nothing left apart from your religion.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that might be the strongest locus of identity that then remains.
[Amit Varma]: That could be one way in which we are different from those times, that the religious part
[Amit Varma]: of it becomes stronger and therefore more tribalistic and more dogmatic and all of those
[Amit Varma]: negative things.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, those other aspects get diluted.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just kind of thinking aloud.
[Guest]: This has been sparked by what you were saying.
[Guest]: Yeah, I agree with you there, of course, you know, because if you go to Sindh, you still
[Guest]: find that people there, for them, being Sindhi is more defining identity than being a Muslim
[Guest]: or a Hindu.
[Guest]: Although, yeah, there is also a movement where the Hindus are using conversion of minor girls
[Guest]: as a political tool to gain asylum outside.
[Guest]: And so that's, again, you know, coming into a very material definition.
[Guest]: When it comes to identity, I think the most important thing is language.
[Guest]: I think, you know, language is what really binds people.
[Guest]: And here with Sindhis, very few young Sindhis actually know the language.
[Guest]: And many can understand, a huge number can understand, but have never tried to speak.
[Guest]: I can say, I was about to say for many of us, I did say that I don't consider myself
[Guest]: a Sindhi, but I know that like every other Sindhi in India or in other parts of the world
[Guest]: except Sindh, you don't hear Sindhi spoken on the street.
[Guest]: You only hear Sindhi spoken in homes.
[Guest]: You hear Sindhi spoken by people you know well.
[Guest]: That's your connection with the language.
[Guest]: You can understand it to an extent, you can't understand the literary words.
[Guest]: And you know, if anybody doesn't want you to understand, they'll know how to speak so
[Guest]: that you won't.
[Guest]: But that feeling, when you hear the language and you feel at home, wherever you hear that
[Guest]: language, you're going to feel the same, right?
[Guest]: And that is something very powerful.
[Guest]: That's why I'm including myself in that.
[Guest]: Even though I said I'm not a Sindhi, when I hear the language spoken, I feel comfortable.
[Guest]: There's a level of feeling, yeah, okay, these are my people, you know.
[Guest]: So coming back to your question about identity, I wanted to tell you about this book I did
[Guest]: during the lockdown, where I got this idea of getting others to write.
[Guest]: And I just wanted to have this collection of work on the Sindhi identity by people who,
[Guest]: different kinds of people.
[Guest]: So I approached a lot of different people.
[Guest]: And of course, some of them are very well known in the field of Sindh studies.
[Guest]: I was lucky to get pretty much everyone who is well known in that field.
[Guest]: But I also asked a lot of other people who are doing different things, like, you know,
[Guest]: artists and writers, young people, not, I meant, photographers and business people,
[Guest]: a lot of business people wrote, different ages, different countries.
[Guest]: And then I put it together and it really makes a good read.
[Guest]: It's called Sindhi Tapestry, Reflections, I've forgotten what this, that's really silly.
[Guest]: It's Reflections on the Sindhi Identity, I think.
[Guest]: And it gives you, you know, by the time you read it, you understood so much about what
[Guest]: Sindhi people went through during partition and what happened, what was left of them.
[Guest]: And yeah, the transformation, which you mentioned of the identity from being a Sindhi to being
[Guest]: a Hindu who has to leave and then to being an outsider who has to conform and integrate
[Guest]: and leave everything behind.
[Guest]: And some of the most common themes we had in that book were, of course, the loss of
[Guest]: language, the regret at the loss of the language.
[Guest]: And there was, of course, this whole thing of adapting, of bravery, of moving ahead.
[Guest]: There was this thing of being amenable to ideas from different sources, accepting them.
[Guest]: There was this thing about facing prejudice, about, I don't know how many, at least three
[Guest]: or four of them wrote about the Sindhi and the snake.
[Guest]: You know, the Sindhi and the snake is a big one.
[Guest]: If you see a Sindhi and a snake, who should you kill?
[Guest]: Actually, you know, I told this once to Rudy Heredia, a professor at St. David's College.
[Guest]: And he was like, yeah, but in India, all our communities do that.
[Guest]: When I was young, it used to be if you see a Brahmin and a snake.
[Guest]: So you know, I think the Sindhis hung on to that snake thing for longer.
[Guest]: And one of them, Nandu Asrani, who is a hereditary Shikarpuri businessman, now Shikarpur is this
[Guest]: place in the north of Sindh.
[Guest]: And they were on that camel trade, which came from Far East and went across to the Middle
[Guest]: East.
[Guest]: They were trading, they were trading on that.
[Guest]: And then eventually, so he's fought, I don't know, I mean, he has the stories of four generations
[Guest]: before him, which is fabulous.
[Guest]: He's full of, he, you know, he's very grounded in his family's history.
[Guest]: And he's also a businessman who has a lot of fun doing moving from one business to another
[Guest]: and enjoys what he's doing.
[Guest]: So those guys, they also started money trade, because you know, that bandit ridden mountain
[Guest]: glacier route wasn't that easy to carry money.
[Guest]: So you leave your money, like this hundi thing, right?
[Guest]: You give your money to somebody who you can trust, and they give you a little slip of
[Guest]: paper and you can cash it anywhere in that same route.
[Guest]: So he said, we are not like snakes, we are like spiders.
[Guest]: That was his analogy, which was really nice.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's lovely, building webs everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as far as that whole question of who should you kill first, snake or Sindhi,
[Amit Varma]: I have a good friend, Ajay Shah, who would actually argue that the correct answer is
[Amit Varma]: it depends because you see, here's the thing, I'll tell you why.
[Amit Varma]: And the answer has nothing to do with Sindhis, but everything to do with snakes, because
[Amit Varma]: according to Ajay, and I'll ask him to elaborate upon it sometime, some snakes, I think he
[Amit Varma]: mentioned cobras and the crates are good snakes, right?
[Amit Varma]: They are very compatible with human beings, they don't mess with humans, they will not
[Amit Varma]: attack you unless you attack them first, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But some snakes like the Russell Viper, if I remember correctly, are scoundrels, right?
[Amit Varma]: I think he basically said that the Russell Vipers are to reptiles, what seagulls are
[Amit Varma]: to birds.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you will at this point say, what is wrong with seagulls?
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, when seagulls attack their prey, they first zoom in and they plug the eyes
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: So even when they attack humans once in a while, which is rare, but it can happen at
[Amit Varma]: sea, they'll first zoom in and plug the eye out, because that's the optimal place to attack
[Unknown]: and then they're just going to win easily.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I used to think that crows are good birds, pigeons are bad birds.
[Amit Varma]: But it turns out that seagulls are the worst birds of all and Russell Vipers.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, but I mean, if you see a Sindhi and a snake, you don't have to kill any of
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: You know, Sindhi and the viper doesn't have the same kind of ring to it.
[Amit Varma]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't have to kill any of them.
[Amit Varma]: And in your tapestries book, the language thing keeps coming up like Atul Khatri, the
[Unknown]: comedian at one point mentions that the Sindhi organizations get upset when he says he won't
[Amit Varma]: perform in Sindhi.
[Guest]: You know, so it's it's almost like you can't Yeah, so actually, that's another thing.
[Guest]: Now, there's this new initiative, which has recently been started by Aruna Madnani, who
[Guest]: runs the Sindhi Culture Foundation out of Bangalore.
[Guest]: And she's been working on this for a really long time.
[Guest]: And she interviews experts on various different aspects of Sindh and those talks have just
[Guest]: been launched in a project which she's called Doorway to Sindh.
[Guest]: And it's fabulous because she's talked to so many people and they are very pleasant
[Guest]: conversations which unveil, they just reveal so much, so much, so much because the people
[Guest]: who are talking are very knowledgeable about their their field.
[Guest]: And you know, if you listen to that, you get into it.
[Guest]: Like when I said something to you about Mohenjo-Daro, it was something that I had learned from Aruna's
[Guest]: Doorway to Sindh, where she had these two experts talking and you know, you think that
[Guest]: Mohenjo-Daro was 5000 years ago, how can there be a common bloodline, you know, between them
[Guest]: and now.
[Guest]: But there is and you know, you can listen like whoever wants to listen to Doorway to
[Guest]: Sindh should because it's pretty good.
[Guest]: And they've just started, they just launched recently.
[Guest]: So she's got six episodes up in the air and there are plenty more to come and each one
[Guest]: I think will be of a very good quality.
[Guest]: So tell me your question again, I was, I got off onto the Doorway to Sindh, which is something
[Amit Varma]: which fascinates me.
[Amit Varma]: No, there was no question.
[Guest]: I was kind of just...
[Guest]: You were saying about tapestry and the language thing and then we said there was something
[Guest]: else also, we talked about the snakes and about the resilience.
[Guest]: I don't think, yeah.
[Guest]: So in tapestry, yeah, people from the armed forces, people, I mean, you know, it was just
[Guest]: this big collection of people and I think the threads come through quite well with that.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense, like talking about Sindh for a while, let's talk about Sindh for a
[Amit Varma]: bit and take kind of a longer perspective than anecdote can kind of give us.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something you've done in your book as well, where you've spoken about both the
[Amit Varma]: history of Sindh all the way from Mohenjodaro onwards and the first coming of Islam, which
[Amit Varma]: was really the first coming of Islam in the subcontinent and how they co-existed and colonization
[Amit Varma]: later on.
[Amit Varma]: But what interests me also is geography, like, you know, it's often said that geography is
[Amit Varma]: destiny in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written about how, you know, Sindh was therefore almost sort of destined to be
[Amit Varma]: a distinct geographical territory by just the mountains around it, by the river Indus
[Amit Varma]: flowing through it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So I think it was like this little enclosed space, which had ample of time to develop
[Guest]: its own culture.
[Guest]: That's the sense that I got.
[Guest]: At the same time, it was on a kind of crossroads.
[Guest]: So anybody entering would pretty much go through Sindh.
[Guest]: So there were a lot of cultural influences, which came from Greece and Persia and Central
[Guest]: Asia, Gujarat, Kutch.
[Guest]: I mean, when you think about it, Karachi to Ahmedabad was a half an hour train journey.
[Guest]: You know, you can't imagine that, right?
[Guest]: I might be mistaken about half an hour, but it was not very far away.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, I was telling you, you know, about the person who was the chairman who came after
[Guest]: partition as the chairman of the newly instituted Bombay Housing Board.
[Guest]: That was Sehjiram Gidwani, who was from Amil family of Sindh.
[Guest]: They owned land, but two of them went to Oxford to study.
[Guest]: And he was the tutor to Vikram and Gautam Sarabhai.
[Guest]: And he worked with Sarabhai, I don't know which one, their mills.
[Guest]: And he was the chairman of the company while, just before he quit to go and be, he was the
[Guest]: head of the mill.
[Guest]: I don't know what they called it, but he was the number one there before he went to join
[Guest]: the housing board.
[Guest]: And it was kind of between Karachi and Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: It was just like, you know, I mean, I don't know whether it was Bombay, Pune, probably
[Amit Varma]: not that close.
[Amit Varma]: I just Googled it.
[Amit Varma]: It was according to Google is 601 kilometers.
[Amit Varma]: So that's not half an hour for sure, but it's not far.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but it's 601 is such a weird number, because why not 600, why not 599?
[Amit Varma]: It's like they've probably just taken the railway stations or something.
[Amit Varma]: Or the GPO, probably just outside the railway station.
[Guest]: So 600, that would be how far, a few hours.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it depends.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think you can assume bullet train.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay, a day.
[Amit Varma]: Assume a train at maybe like 100 K an hour at six hours, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So not too far.
[Guest]: Calcutta was also a very, very close connection to Sindh, Bengal.
[Guest]: And I have read accounts of where it says it was a seven day journey.
[Guest]: So it was in my head that it was a seven day journey until somebody told me that they studied
[Guest]: at Shantiniketan and they would go and it was two nights on the train.
[Guest]: So it was obviously by then the railways had speeded up.
[Guest]: It was, of course, a seven day journey when Hiranandadwani went and he was the Mukhi's
[Guest]: son and he kind of went incognito because he had been reading about the Brahmo Samaj.
[Guest]: And he went, Keshav Mukherjee, and he went to Calcutta to meet him and become his student.
[Guest]: And he came back so full of what he'd learned, which was how religions should all treat everybody
[Guest]: equally and women should be treated equally.
[Guest]: And he started this huge women's education movement, which was, which took off in Sindh.
[Guest]: I mean, among the Hindus, at least it was a big thing.
[Guest]: And there was such a strong connection with Bengal.
[Guest]: They were such big fans of Tagore.
[Guest]: They had, there was this MU Malkani who had translated, a young man at that time, he translated
[Guest]: Tagore's poems and he acted, they acted in them and Tagore himself came.
[Guest]: I have a photo of Tagore in the home of, who lived, he lived with, I mean, he stayed with
[Guest]: the Diyaldas family who had businesses and then they performed the play for him.
[Guest]: And I mean, lovely descriptions of all that.
[Guest]: But one doesn't think of Sindhis as being cultural, you know, in that sense of being
[Guest]: open to other cultures.
[Guest]: I mean, these are facts.
[Guest]: It's nice to, if young Sindhis understand this about themselves and their heritage.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, you know, you mentioned the Brahmo Samaj link elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about sort of the role of women in Sindhi society.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you write, quote, I discussed an early draft of this book with Madhavi Kapoor
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things she said was missing was certain aspects of the role of women in
[Amit Varma]: Sindhi society.
[Amit Varma]: In the Sindhi families we had known, the women had assumed a privileged position.
[Amit Varma]: As girls they were pampered, as wives given a decision making authority, unusual in Indian
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: Women held the money, Madhavi pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: The men would just hand over everything to them.
[Amit Varma]: They participated in financial decisions and they owned property, not just in name, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: In many families, girls and women were fussed over, they must never walk barefoot, must
[Amit Varma]: never bow to touch another's feet as a show of respect.
[Amit Varma]: They must never ever carry anything heavy.
[Amit Varma]: What was the reason for this determined coseting?
[Amit Varma]: Could it be the influence of the Brahmo Samaj and its focus on women's empowerment?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and what also kind of struck me earlier is that in many other ways, like just from
[Amit Varma]: your grandparents' life, your great-grandparents' life itself, it seems in other ways to be
[Amit Varma]: a backward society, like all of India, like all of the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: For example, your great-grandparents got married when they were 12 and 11 respectively.
[Amit Varma]: I think he was a couple of months short of his 12th birthday.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so you look at something like that and you kind of realize how far we've come
[Amit Varma]: and how backward those times were.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you know, you speak about Sindhi women having sort of living much
[Amit Varma]: more empowered lives than women elsewhere in the subcontinent do even today, right?
[Amit Varma]: Even today, I think by and large, it's fair to say of South Asia that women are kind of
[Amit Varma]: treated as second class citizens and it's, you know, outside of elite pockets, it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of pretty horrendous.
[Amit Varma]: And the Brahmo Samaj would be a relatively recent thing going back maybe a hundred years.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, do you think that geographical sense that, you know, people came and went,
[Amit Varma]: people invaded sometimes, people traded, there was a lot of trade, but otherwise it was cosetted
[Amit Varma]: off and, you know, as a region and didn't intermingle so much.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that that was a protection against, you know, extremism of some kind, if I'm sort
[Guest]: of thinking along?
[Guest]: I don't know, Amit, it's very confusing.
[Guest]: It's impossible to actually know the truth of this because I don't, I haven't seen anything
[Guest]: which can lead me to answer that because, you know, I'm talking about the Hindu women.
[Guest]: And I read this thing written by Zahida Rehman, who is a Sindhi writer.
[Guest]: And she said that in Hyderabad, Hyderabad in the 1940s, it was the height of misogyny.
[Guest]: Now, I know that's not true for the people that I know.
[Guest]: I know for sure.
[Guest]: I can give you hundreds of examples.
[Guest]: And I mean hundreds, not just a dozen, you know, not just the elite families.
[Guest]: How many women in the 1930s, because they were bright students, were sent to Delhi to
[Guest]: study at Lady Harding College and live in the hostel there in the 30s and 40s, when,
[Guest]: as you said, the rest of India, they weren't allowed to cross the road.
[Guest]: I mean, women of their social...
[Guest]: Socio-economic background.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so that was there.
[Guest]: Then I have stories like I was telling you my story, which I'm so proud of, that I went
[Guest]: to Europe when I was 20.
[Guest]: I have a story from Sindh in the early 40s.
[Guest]: There was this group of Sindhi girls who was taken by some European nanny, not nanny, she
[Guest]: must have been like a teacher.
[Guest]: And they traveled all over Europe and they got their photos taken in Barcelona and wearing
[Guest]: saris.
[Guest]: And I have been, you know, clipping with that.
[Guest]: They were teachers.
[Guest]: They were ticket collectors.
[Guest]: That tells you a lot about the society, right?
[Guest]: Where a man will show you his ticket, you know?
[Guest]: It's impossible, right?
[Guest]: Even today, will they show their ticket to a woman in UP or Bihar?
[Guest]: So I don't know, it's very, very difficult to know.
[Guest]: Because if you're talking about the geographical isolation and you're talking about someone
[Guest]: saying it was the height of misogyny, I don't know whether it was an exaggeration or whether
[Guest]: the Muslim women were definitely not given those privileges.
[Guest]: But yeah, I realized only recently, I used to feel that I'm very privileged because my
[Guest]: father was a feminist.
[Guest]: I realized only recently my mother didn't care.
[Guest]: I mean, she was who she was, you know, which is better than being a feminist, right?
[Guest]: You just like, you're who you are and you're okay with that.
[Guest]: And you know, someone gets in your way, you shout at them.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's the same as being a feminist.
[Guest]: I know, I know, I was just being facetious, but yeah, it is actually what it is, you know,
[Guest]: without the label.
[Guest]: And you use the label.
[Guest]: And again, then you get these little, you know, you have to be strident, you have to
[Guest]: do this and that.
[Guest]: You're a real feminist without a label.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point, tell me also about, like, one of the things that strikes me as interesting
[Amit Varma]: about Sindh is the dynamic of Muslims and Hindus there, which seems quite different
[Amit Varma]: from the rest of the subcontinent, as it were.
[Guest]: Actually, you know, I think everywhere people were friendly with their neighbors and the,
[Guest]: you know, it wasn't such a big deal until, I don't know whether you really can blame
[Guest]: the British.
[Guest]: They made a big difference by doing divide and rule and by, you know, things like in
[Guest]: Sindh, what happened is when the British came in, you have to fill a census form, right,
[Guest]: saying what you are.
[Guest]: And you're told to say you're a Hindu or a Muslim, actually, you're a Sikh.
[Guest]: What do you fill?
[Guest]: You fill Hindu.
[Guest]: So you've become a Hindu, you know, and they ask you, what is your caste?
[Guest]: Now, most of them who I, I mean, you know, the people who I've interviewed, they are
[Guest]: all Suvarna.
[Guest]: Okay, they are not, they go around saying we don't have any caste, we have a few Brahmins
[Guest]: and they have no power over us, they just do our rituals for us, we sometimes laugh
[Guest]: at them.
[Guest]: We, our Jnani, we have Jnani, which is a young girl, the woman, the girl of the house, she
[Guest]: is much more powerful than any Brahmin in a puja.
[Guest]: So they would be asked, what's your caste?
[Guest]: And they would write Lohana, nobody knew, till today, there are so many different ideas
[Guest]: about what Lohana may be or may not be.
[Guest]: So I think there was a lot of cordiality between these communities everywhere, and in Sindh
[Guest]: in particular, because the language was the same, because the problem was, if there was
[Guest]: a difference, it was a socio-economic difference.
[Guest]: The Hindus, where if they were traders, they were, they had the money, and then they were
[Guest]: lending money, and by lending money, they were getting richer and richer, and they were
[Guest]: eventually getting the land from the landowners who were borrowing money from them.
[Guest]: And this became quite rampant in British times, when the taxes were so high, that the landowners
[Guest]: weren't earning enough to pay those taxes, they had to borrow from the Hindu moneylenders
[Guest]: to pay those taxes, and eventually the land was taken over by those moneylenders.
[Guest]: So A, that was one difference.
[Guest]: Then the second difference was the difference of education, because the Hindus just leapt
[Guest]: on to the new school and college schooling, the education which the British brought in,
[Guest]: because they could see that this is going to take you somewhere, it's going to give
[Guest]: you a job, and you're going to do well, and you will be part of the whole, you know, I'm
[Guest]: the boss game.
[Guest]: So that, again, I think what I've understood is that the leaders of the community did not
[Guest]: want their children, they wanted the madrasa learning, where they would learn Arabic and
[Guest]: they would stay within the faith.
[Guest]: So I think that was the difference.
[Guest]: And as a result, you had Muslims working on the farms, and many of the farms were owned
[Guest]: by Hindus.
[Guest]: Of course, most of the farms were owned by the Waderos, the Sindhi landlords, but, you
[Guest]: know, they were also all worked on by Muslims.
[Guest]: The craftsmen were Muslims.
[Guest]: Those who sold their craft and who sold them internationally, they were Hindus.
[Guest]: So those were actually social differences and economic differences.
[Guest]: It wasn't really a tussle between the religion.
[Guest]: Clothes were the same, they wore the same clothes.
[Guest]: The women didn't cover their heads as fanatically as, yeah, there were times when they'd go
[Guest]: out and I've heard of this thing called Akhri, where you cover everything except your eye,
[Guest]: but it was not that common.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and in fact, it's interesting how much clothes can reveal, like there's this interesting
[Amit Varma]: para where, and I think this is in your mother's voice, where I'll just quote this out, quote
[Amit Varma]: where she says, Daddy was westernized, perhaps influenced by the judges, who were mostly
[Amit Varma]: English and Scottish.
[Amit Varma]: It was a time in our country when many educated people took up Western ways.
[Amit Varma]: You could tell that a man was educated if he was wearing trousers.
[Amit Varma]: In Sindh, men and women traditionally wore pajamas with kurtas.
[Amit Varma]: It was the Pathans who wore salwars.
[Amit Varma]: We wore churidars only to feel snug and warm in the cold weather.
[Amit Varma]: My grandmother wore one when she was ill.
[Amit Varma]: In our family, the boys wore shorts and trousers, and the girls wore Western style dresses.
[Amit Varma]: Many slept in their day clothes, but we wore night suits, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminded me of how when Chandrabhan Prasadji was on the show recently, he always
[Amit Varma]: wears a suit.
[Amit Varma]: And he always wears a suit because to him being a Dalit, you know, Indian clothes carry,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so many layers of the past within them, that wearing a suit is his way of breaking
[Amit Varma]: free out of that and just kind of asserting that.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I found fascinating, and this goes with the stereotype of the Jugaru
[Amit Varma]: Sindhi, the Sindhi who can, you know, manage anywhere, is how you speak about how they
[Amit Varma]: not only assimilate very well, even when Mohammed bin Qasim invades in the 8th century CE, and
[Amit Varma]: that's perhaps, you know, the advent of Islam into the subcontinent as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But they also over time become, as you point out, by the 18th century, the administrative
[Amit Varma]: backbone of Sindh, that before that the Bhaibans have become international traders.
[Amit Varma]: And here you say, quote, in the 18th century, after centuries of Muslim rule, it was the
[Amit Varma]: Hindus who formed the administrative backbone of Sindh.
[Amit Varma]: The rulers were Muslim, but the amils of Sindh were revenue collectors making financial decisions
[Amit Varma]: within the court.
[Amit Varma]: And it was the Bhaibans who controlled the economy outside.
[Amit Varma]: In this scenario, it's hard to see the Hindus of Sindh as having been an oppressed minority
[Amit Varma]: in a Muslim dominated region.
[Amit Varma]: While they demonstrated unmistakably Islamic influences in their daily life, it is likely
[Amit Varma]: that many of these choices had been made from positions of privilege, perhaps with a view
[Amit Varma]: to maintaining these positions, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Did you feel that there was a danger in your first book, not later, but in your first book
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, the banished Sindh as it were, did you feel there was a danger that
[Amit Varma]: because you were talking to some of the more, some of the relatively privileged people of
[Amit Varma]: the time, that you would only see perhaps one part of the story that you would, you
[Amit Varma]: know, hear women's stories where women were, you know, having a well off and with many
[Unknown]: servants.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, like at one point in your family, you speak about this house, I think in Jacobabad,
[Amit Varma]: this grand bungalow, one of the grand uncles had, which was a grand bungalow, but no electricity.
[Amit Varma]: So in the evening, you would have pankhas with, you know, manual laborers sort of moving
[Amit Varma]: the pankhas so that the people of the family can get some breeze.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't speak of those laborers and we don't, in this book.
[Guest]: They were Muslims, right?
[Amit Varma]: They were Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, mostly.
[Amit Varma]: So is that a distinction also to be drawn because they were also Sindhi, but Muslim
[Guest]: Sindhis.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that was the division, right?
[Guest]: Mostly they were either Muslim Sindhis or they were Hindus from other parts of Sindh.
[Guest]: And it's something which I only discovered very recently at a conference in Paris a few
[Guest]: years ago, I think about four years ago, where they have this, they used to do it every year.
[Guest]: And South Asians, it's a conference of South Asians, people come from all over the world.
[Guest]: It's amazing how South Asians are in every country.
[Guest]: There were three papers on the Dalits of Sindh and they use the word Dalits.
[Guest]: So, you know, long after partition, when the Hindus have gone, there are huge populations
[Guest]: of Dalits in Sindh, which is just fascinating.
[Guest]: You know, it just tells you that these are the invisible people and they're still tilling
[Guest]: the farms and, you know, they're leading lives of peasantry.
[Guest]: And yeah, some of them have come out, they've got educated, they're in the mainstream, they
[Guest]: are working in the administrative service of the government.
[Guest]: They may not be, you know, they can't, like, for example, I have a friend who's one of
[Guest]: them and he sends me photos occasionally and he, I'm not allowed to use his name, you know,
[Guest]: because I'm enemy country, right?
[Unknown]: And he works for the government.
[Guest]: So his photos will be carried without an acknowledgement.
[Guest]: There are so many, I mean, and I don't know, it's again something like I was telling you
[Guest]: that every now and then I learn something completely new and or I have a new insight,
[Guest]: which is different from what we were talking about just now, but since I remember it, I'll
[Guest]: tell you, which is that the history disappeared and recent history, especially like in Sindh,
[Guest]: for example, there is, most of the cities were actually built by the Hindus who built
[Guest]: Karachi Hindu traders who built Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Yeah, Hyderabad was built by the king, but who selected the site, who built the, you
[Guest]: know, oversaw the building of the fort, who laid the roads and, you know, decided who
[Guest]: was going to live there.
[Guest]: That was the Hindu Amal, who did that.
[Guest]: So every city has the story of the Hindus having built it.
[Guest]: And today, I again, this is a conference in Pakistan, which it was online during the lockdown.
[Guest]: I attended this conference, wonderful conference, where one of the things I saw, and I wrote
[Guest]: about this somewhere, I can't remember the details, but I know I can access it at any
[Guest]: point because I've written about it.
[Guest]: This researcher who is so pro-understanding the recent history, she is calling, and it's
[Guest]: a common phrase, I've heard it used elsewhere also, these houses of Sindh, which were built
[Guest]: in the 1940s, it's called Hindu architecture.
[Guest]: Now, these are mansions, which the wealthy merchants of Sindh built.
[Guest]: They were trading overseas, they were making lots of money, it was all coming back into
[Guest]: Sindh.
[Guest]: They were investing in the civic infrastructure of Karachi, Hyderabad, Shikarpur, and the
[Guest]: other places where they were, mostly it was Hyderabad.
[Guest]: And they were building homes for themselves, like you see Lachhu Lodge, 1940, finished
[Guest]: Lachhu, oh, 42, five years later, Lachhu's out, I mean, his lodge is still there, but
[Guest]: now it's being called Hindu architecture.
[Guest]: It's a funny thing is that I have seen exactly the same architecture in downtown Cairo, same
[Guest]: structures, same balconies, the same kind of frills on the buildings, because they were
[Guest]: using the same architects.
[Guest]: They had their businesses in Cairo and Aden and wherever, and those houses were being
[Guest]: built and they might be of the same vintage.
[Guest]: I'm assuming that they are of the same vintage, built by the same people.
[Guest]: But yeah, we were talking about the, we were talking about the different social hierarchies
[Amit Varma]: in place, Hindus, Muslims, and did that in any way, sort of, by circumstance, many of
[Amit Varma]: the stories you told were of the sort of the privileged Hindu upper class?
[Guest]: Yeah, they were.
[Guest]: In fact, that's one of the objections.
[Guest]: When they reviewed Sindhi tapestry in Dawn, it got a rave review, but that was the point
[Guest]: which the reviewer said, that I want to read the stories of those who did not succeed.
[Guest]: And I thought that maybe there aren't that many, you know, because the reason I'm thinking
[Guest]: like this is because everywhere you go, you find well of Sindhis, you don't see, and,
[Guest]: you know, we did, I did know Sindhis when I was younger, who lived in like Gopal Mansion,
[Guest]: for example, lots and lots of people, Gopal Mansion is this place near Bandra station.
[Guest]: And it's a little up from a chawl, not much, but, you know, very, very simple.
[Guest]: All those people now own bungalows and they own like three apartments each in Pali, you
[Guest]: know, there's nobody, you know, so everybody's moved up.
[Guest]: And everyone who came from partition, like they were studying in Sindhi schools, or they
[Guest]: were living in the camps, they've all moved up.
[Guest]: And those areas are occupied by migrants from other states or from the underprivileged of
[Guest]: that local community.
[Guest]: Where are the ones who are not that well off?
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, I think if I go to Pimpri and really walk around, I might find, I'll find
[Guest]: some who haven't succeeded that well in business, of course, but they won't be representative.
[Guest]: They'll be like the other end of the bell curve.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the phrase, Hindu trader.
[Guest]: And the only reason I love it is...
[Amit Varma]: Hindu architecture.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: Before that, you'd said Hindu trader.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I love the phrase is because one of the most resonant phrases in literature
[Amit Varma]: for me is Hindu trader sandwich, which comes from Hemingway's short story, The Good Lion.
[Amit Varma]: Have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: No, I must.
[Amit Varma]: It's about a lion who likes Hindu trader sandwiches.
[Guest]: So Hindu traders have been around for, they've been all over.
[Amit Varma]: Hindu traders are famous indeed when they're not making buildings in Cairo, they are providing
[Amit Varma]: sandwich filling for good lions.
[Amit Varma]: Just thinking of social hierarchies, I'm struck by what you said that who built those cities?
[Amit Varma]: It might have been a Muslim ruler who commissioned them, but it was sort of Hindus and the Amirs
[Amit Varma]: who built them.
[Amit Varma]: But then if you go one layer deeper, who built them, built them, who carried the stones?
[Amit Varma]: The bricklayers.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they were definitely the Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: Then you'll come to Muslims, you'll come to Harijans.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting bits in your book is where you quote a Harijan, you know, talking
[Amit Varma]: about why he stayed back and saying, quote, who would murder a Harijan?
[Amit Varma]: We were not afraid of conversion either.
[Amit Varma]: Who would try to convert us?
[Amit Varma]: Muslims did not do the sweeper's jobs.
[Amit Varma]: I was not worried at all and nothing changed for us.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this was shortly after you mentioned that how after partition, the toilets of all these
[Guest]: cities were overflowing and there was so much dirt because the Hindus had left, which is
[Guest]: so interesting.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so they were definitely Hindus of the lower caste.
[Guest]: But what I've been told is that they were not Sindhi, which I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: What does that mean?
[Guest]: If they lived in Sindh, why were they not Sindhi?
[Guest]: They had their own language and their own culture is what I was given to understand.
[Guest]: But now that, you know, I think about this and knowing that, yeah, Sindh is full of Dalits
[Guest]: even today, they must have been.
[Guest]: And Dalits of Sindh may not be actually speaking the same Sindhi that people of Hyderabad and
[Guest]: Karachi speak.
[Guest]: They probably speak their own Sindhi, their own dialect.
[Guest]: I don't know, Amit.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, this whole thing is so complicated.
[Guest]: It's so, so, so.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, I have a friend, she runs an NGO in Kherodero, which is my
[Guest]: Nana's village.
[Guest]: And it's also her Nana's village.
[Guest]: So that created a bond between us immediately.
[Guest]: And we became friends.
[Guest]: And I asked her that, does anybody remember the Bijlani's in Kherodero?
[Guest]: So she went around asking, nobody remembered.
[Guest]: But she said, yeah, we have a Hindu family.
[Guest]: And I was like, wow, who are they?
[Guest]: She said, I don't know, like, they're a bit different.
[Guest]: I don't know what they are exactly.
[Guest]: But they want us to build a temple for them since we are building toilets and schools
[Guest]: and all.
[Guest]: They've asked us to build a temple for them and they're Dalits.
[Guest]: They've come from upcountry and they've settled in Kherodero.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and maybe that is what has truly vanished.
[Amit Varma]: Because you can still, I mean, you are there to write about the history of Sindh, of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, your people as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But there is something that, like, if they spoke a different language, what was it?
[Amit Varma]: Where did that come from?
[Amit Varma]: What was, you know, what was their history, like post partition is also fascinating, but
[Amit Varma]: not within the remit of what you're doing.
[Guest]: No, no, there's so much work to be done and it is being done by so many people.
[Guest]: Like I said, there are scholars who were presenting papers about the Dalits.
[Amit Varma]: So these are questions for them.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also point out is like when I read in your book about the history of Sindh
[Amit Varma]: through all these centuries, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's largely a story of assimilation with the massive rupture of partition.
[Amit Varma]: But what happens after partition is that you talk about how Sindhis are viewed today in
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan by Mohajis, for example, who have occupied Sindh and you write, quote, mistrust
[Amit Varma]: and stereotyping between two ethnic communities is not unusual in a society, but the intellectual
[Amit Varma]: class is usually less contaminated.
[Amit Varma]: Here I've noticed that a section of Mohajis, including some intellectuals, look down upon
[Amit Varma]: the Sindhis as uncultured and undeserving, primarily farmhands and landlords.
[Amit Varma]: There was resentment at the job reservations Bhutto introduced.
[Amit Varma]: After partition, ethnic nationalities had been suppressed.
[Amit Varma]: Mohajis were powerful in bureaucracy, Punjabis in the army.
[Amit Varma]: Bhutto came to power soon after Bangladesh was created and ethnic identity assumed huge
[Amit Varma]: proportions, stop quote, and Bhutto, of course, being a Sindhi himself, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, Bhutto is Sindhi, the family is from Larkana.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, in India, if we look at the sort of the story of Sindhis, it's largely a benign
[Amit Varma]: story.
[Amit Varma]: There are stereotypes of Sindhis being opportunistic or whatever, or sometimes loud and crass and
[Amit Varma]: you detailed many of them out.
[Amit Varma]: But the community has really worked hard, gotten ahead, you know, been enterprising,
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: By and large, it's a benign, positive journey that Sindhis have made through India.
[Amit Varma]: What's happened in Pakistan, though?
[Guest]: So I think the first big blow was something which was called One Unit in 1950, where they
[Guest]: said that now we are one country, we have one language, and they brought in Urdu.
[Guest]: And of course, that was the first step towards the creation of Bangladesh, right?
[Guest]: Because you can't imagine all of Bengal speaking Urdu.
[Guest]: I mean, that's absolute rubbish.
[Guest]: But that happened in Sindh, because the Sindhi people are much more mild.
[Guest]: And you know, they were, as I said, they were not in positions of power, because the people
[Guest]: within the positions of power left, and they were replaced by outsiders who didn't understand
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: And so they actually got colonized.
[Guest]: That was the first thing that happened.
[Guest]: They were not able to ever really restore their dignity to an extent, because they were
[Guest]: looked down on, and they were, you know, they were said, oh, you're only, they were told
[Guest]: you're only fit to drive a camel cart and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And I think it didn't help that some of the landowners were not cultured, really.
[Guest]: You know, they had not, they were not educated.
[Guest]: They just had a lot of money.
[Guest]: And that's the same in many places where there are people who own land, and they don't realize
[Guest]: that they are just living off these poor people.
[Guest]: They're getting a lot of money, and they're not sharing any of it, and it's a really horrible
[Guest]: thing to do.
[Guest]: So that is part of what happened.
[Guest]: And they really miss, even when we went, which was how many years after partition, I mean,
[Guest]: 65 plus something, more than 65 years, because I wrote the book 65 years after.
[Guest]: Soon after that, we went to launch that book at the Karachi Literature Festival.
[Guest]: And there people were saying, why did you leave?
[Guest]: And I'm like, no, I didn't leave.
[Guest]: I don't know anything about this place.
[Guest]: And why don't you come back?
[Guest]: Which is so sweet, but it's not something that anybody would want to do.
[Guest]: People might want to go back to visit the home that they once lived in.
[Guest]: Ah, my mom never came.
[Guest]: She didn't want to.
[Guest]: When we were going, I wanted her so badly to come, but she completely refused.
[Guest]: And she said, no, they threw us out.
[Guest]: Why should I go?
[Guest]: And I remember people, when I said that my mother says she's not coming because they
[Guest]: threw us out, why should I go?
[Guest]: And I remember Irfan Ali, who I am still in touch with, who we met on Facebook.
[Guest]: And he said, please tell her we are very, very sorry.
[Guest]: All of us are.
[Guest]: Please tell her to accept our apologies.
[Guest]: And we really wanted to come so that we can show her how very sorry we are.
[Guest]: You know, we got messages like that.
[Guest]: So there's that huge outpouring of love and sadness, guilt, you know.
[Guest]: I think they talk more about the suffering of the Hindus than the Hindus talk about.
[Guest]: Because the Hindus are like, OK, we went through a bad time.
[Guest]: It got over.
[Guest]: We moved on.
[Guest]: But they, you know, feel that they still talk about it, which I don't really like that much.
[Guest]: But, you know, I appreciate that they still acknowledge it and they feel bad about it.
[Amit Varma]: When I traveled to Pakistan in 2006, I was covering the cricket tour there.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that sort of struck me, and I knew it at an intellectual level,
[Amit Varma]: but I had to go there to experience it, is that we are basically the same people, right?
[Amit Varma]: Lahore is just so much like Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Lahore has much more in common with Delhi than, say, Delhi has with Chennai, for example.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that could be two foreign countries.
[Amit Varma]: Karachi with Bombay, likewise.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these are cliches, but I really felt it when I actually went there and the warmth
[Amit Varma]: was unbelievable.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, sometimes I think that today we would not be, I'm not sure a reciprocal warmth would
[Amit Varma]: necessarily be there, which is truly tragic.
[Amit Varma]: But the warmth, again, it'll sound like cliches where shopkeepers don't take your money and
[Unknown]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: It's just, you know, it's kind of all of that.
[Amit Varma]: In your interactions with people from across the border, including other Sindhis, do you
[Amit Varma]: get that sense too, that fine, Pakistan was a huge rupture, but what has divided us is
[Amit Varma]: the politics, is sort of the different leaderships and their imperatives and incentives, and
[Amit Varma]: even those just happened at that particular point in time, you know.
[Amit Varma]: If independence happens a few months later, you know, Jinnah's dead, the whole position
[Amit Varma]: could be different.
[Amit Varma]: If it happens earlier, things could be different.
[Amit Varma]: It just kind of happened like that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, given that, you know, people talk about the partition of Punjab or the
[Amit Varma]: partition of Bengal, but Sindhis went through a painful rupture as well.
[Amit Varma]: And today you can meet them across the border and you spoke about, you know, that in general,
[Amit Varma]: the sentiment there is so positive, that is regretful there that people had to leave and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is, of course, some resentment here, but you still feel that connection with
[Amit Varma]: your homeland.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think there is something to that?
[Amit Varma]: Because more and more as time goes by, I find that lines on a map are kind of becoming irrelevant
[Amit Varma]: in this globalized world.
[Guest]: It would be so nice if that was true.
[Guest]: And I did say when I last left on my second and final visit to Sindh, that I'll never
[Guest]: go back until the borders open, and I'm not trying to say that I'm speaking for Khanda
[Guest]: Bharat or anything like that, of course not.
[Amit Varma]: I was wondering, SARS is going where with this, where?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: What I meant to say is that, you know, if I can drive across the border and just flash
[Guest]: my passport, you know, like you do when you're traveling in Europe, I mean, you don't even
[Guest]: have to flash your passport, just drive through, you pay the toll and you pass through.
[Amit Varma]: That's the, that is the only time I'll ever go back.
[Amit Varma]: Which is what it kind of was for a decade and a half after.
[Guest]: It may not have been that much.
[Guest]: Like my dad went back in, when I say back, he went for the first time, he's traveled
[Guest]: to Sindh, he's traveled to Karachi.
[Guest]: And he was, it was in 1957.
[Guest]: So he was, and I saw the papers after my mom died, we were cleaning up her stuff, we found
[Guest]: this passport, red color passport, which says India Pakistan passport.
[Guest]: And it was my dad's.
[Guest]: And this was before he became a tea planter.
[Guest]: He was working for a pharmaceutical company in Bombay, and his boss, a French pharmaceutical
[Guest]: company.
[Guest]: And his boss loved him.
[Guest]: And he took him to Pakistan on a business development visit.
[Guest]: So he had to have that passport.
[Guest]: And he had to leave it because he was an Indian, he had to leave the passport with the police
[Guest]: at the immigration.
[Guest]: And when he came back, he had to collect the passport to be able to leave.
[Guest]: And they couldn't find his passport.
[Guest]: So I don't know how many hours it took.
[Guest]: They took him into a room, which had, it was full of trunks, and the trunks were all open.
[Guest]: And the trunks were full of passports.
[Guest]: So the passport had to be found.
[Guest]: It was in one of those trunks.
[Guest]: And eventually they found it and they gave it to him.
[Guest]: And he burst out crying.
[Guest]: This is what he used to tell us.
[Guest]: That's all I know.
[Guest]: And I read, so I found the papers, I realized that he had had to apply and you know how
[Guest]: he went and he must have been there on the 10th Independence Day.
[Guest]: I never got a chance to ask him what that was like, which is too bad.
[Guest]: But it wasn't just walking across the border.
[Guest]: You know, you did need a passport.
[Guest]: You did.
[Guest]: You could have lost your passport because, you know, they wanted to show you that they
[Guest]: were the boss, at least for a while at that point.
[Guest]: So it was, it became much harder with the wars.
[Guest]: And then, of course, after the war of 72, there was just this big steel wall which nobody
[Guest]: could ever penetrate.
[Guest]: But right from the beginning, the problem was not just passing back and forth even information.
[Guest]: You didn't know what was happening.
[Guest]: So that's why, you know, again, it became vanished because there was just nothing coming
[Guest]: through.
[Guest]: I don't think the border was ever completely easy, although you hear of people who would
[Guest]: go and come back because they would sneak across, they knew the points where nobody
[Guest]: was watching.
[Guest]: And now, of course, that's not possible anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, before this, when we took a break, we also had lunch.
[Amit Varma]: So we actually took a break.
[Amit Varma]: And we were chatting about how this should be an OTT.
[Amit Varma]: And my suggestion was that, you know, this could be a great web series with three overlapping
[Amit Varma]: storylines of modern Sindhi family or Sindhi family in the 40s before partition and some
[Amit Varma]: old timers in the family back in, you know, different times.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking if that OTT is ever made, you know, season one, episode one should
[Unknown]: begin with that shot of a room full of steel trunks, all of them open and all full of these
[Amit Varma]: red India Pakistan passports, what a tremendous, you know, what a lovely shot.
[Amit Varma]: Can I ask you a question, which it feels intrusive, so you don't have to answer it if you don't
[Amit Varma]: want to.
[Amit Varma]: My father had died last year and we sold off his house.
[Amit Varma]: And while we were getting rid of it, I had to go through all the things, right, most
[Amit Varma]: of which we had to chuck away, some of which one kept and going through things accumulated
[Amit Varma]: over decades is almost like seeing a life unfold before you in haphazard ways, in different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Unknown]: And you mentioned you found this passport when you were going through your mother's
[Unknown]: sins.
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel comfortable talking about what else you found?
[Guest]: And what did that sort of evoke in you?
[Guest]: You mean the precious things that she'd kept, right, they had kept right through their moves.
[Guest]: So they lived on a tier state and they could there keep everything they wanted, they had
[Guest]: a lot of stuff.
[Guest]: Then they moved to Bangalore where they lived in a much smaller place.
[Guest]: After my dad, his Parkinson's became too much for them to, for him to continue.
[Guest]: Actually he could have still worked, he could have still continued with his job, but he
[Guest]: didn't want and he had stopped driving.
[Guest]: He could have continued to work, but he didn't want people to see him deteriorating.
[Guest]: So anyway, they moved to Bangalore, which was smaller, so they must have chucked off
[Guest]: a lot of stuff.
[Guest]: Then they came to live with us, which was on like a huge campaign to bring them.
[Guest]: So then also they must have thrown away a lot of stuff.
[Guest]: So what they kept would have been what really meant a lot to them.
[Guest]: And one of the things I remember now, which is so lovely, is a collection of salary slips
[Guest]: that my mother earned and that was for a very short time.
[Guest]: I don't remember how long, but there's this bunch of salary slips.
[Guest]: Now she was somebody, my parents met in college in Bombay, they were, they were at National
[Guest]: College and National College is a huge and lovely Sindhi story, which I love telling.
[Guest]: And it was only along the way I started telling that story out of sheer passion for this guy,
[Guest]: you know, the story and how this man Kundnani, he was a professor at National College.
[Guest]: In Hyderabad Sindh, that's a college my grandfather studied at, and I'm sure my uncle Kanna must
[Guest]: have also studied there and my mom would have studied there if she had, I mean, she was
[Guest]: only 13 when they left, that wasn't necessary.
[Guest]: And when partition took place, at that time, most of the students and most of the teachers
[Guest]: were Hindus.
[Guest]: So after partition, anyway, during the troubles, like everything was closed.
[Guest]: And finally, sometime in, I don't remember the date, but I think probably November something
[Guest]: 1947, or maybe even later, college opened, hardly anyone came, things were just going
[Guest]: to seed and he decided now I have to go and I'm going to take my college with me.
[Guest]: So he packed up some laboratory equipment and he packed up some books and he took them
[Guest]: with a peon, Dayaram, whose name I found on the National College website, went to Hyderabad
[Guest]: station and they tried, when they wanted to, they asked him what's inside the trunks and
[Guest]: he said, it's treasure.
[Guest]: So they opened it and they saw books and they said, huh, and they, you know, he got into
[Guest]: the train and he came to Bombay and he was staying, like most families with many others
[Guest]: in a small place, very crowded, person who told me this was a young boy at that time
[Guest]: and he said that Kundanani used to sit down every Sunday and write a stack of postcards.
[Guest]: Every Sunday he would write a stack of postcards and he was sending them to his former colleagues
[Guest]: at National College and they were all over in Ajmer and Bhopal and Pune and blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah.
[Guest]: And he was telling them, I'm going to build a college and you will soon have your place
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: And, you know, you may be working in your uncle's shop or you may be giving tuitions
[Guest]: or you may be frying tikkis or whatever, but you will get your professor job back.
[Guest]: And he built National College in Bombay with a lot of, I mean, it's a story of entrepreneurship
[Guest]: and whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: And that's where my parents met.
[Guest]: So it's a big deal.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I realized along the way I was telling the story and it's a fab story,
[Guest]: but it's a story which is essential to me also because, you know, I wouldn't have been
[Guest]: there if there wasn't any National College.
[Guest]: So then they both did their masters in chemistry and my father got this job with a pharmaceutical
[Guest]: company and my mother was teaching at National College.
[Guest]: She started off as a demonstrator in the chem lab.
[Guest]: So she would have continued there and being, you know, the bossy person that she is, she
[Guest]: would have pretty soon been the head of the chemistry department and lived happily ever
[Guest]: after as I suppose heads of chemistry departments do.
[Guest]: But then she became a planter's wife and she couldn't work.
[Guest]: There was a time when in my school they needed a science teacher and the headmaster asked
[Guest]: her, will you do it?
[Guest]: And she came.
[Guest]: She worked there for two months or something.
[Guest]: I don't remember how long.
[Guest]: It may have been longer.
[Guest]: It might have been longer because there are people who still remember her from my brother's
[Guest]: class and a class younger than her and they remember her like a really wonderful person
[Guest]: which used to make me wonder, well, are they talking about the same person who I knew?
[Guest]: But anyway, anyway, so, you know, that thing of the salary slips, I was so touched.
[Guest]: She obviously like it really meant a lot to her.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I can't remember if there was anything much else, but whatever there was, I didn't throw
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I mean, I have a little museum.
[Guest]: My office is a little museum, which has things.
[Guest]: And I have some things from Sindh, which is almost unbelievable.
[Guest]: I don't know how it happened.
[Guest]: I have like there's a small little silver thing with a stick and it's got my mom's name
[Guest]: written underneath Situ.
[Guest]: It's a Surma.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: We never used it.
[Guest]: We were never, my grandmother was never allowed to put Surma in her eyes because according
[Guest]: to my mom, it has antimony in it.
[Guest]: That's what happens when you study chemistry, right?
[Guest]: You know, you know what goes into Surma.
[Guest]: And then I have this pot.
[Guest]: It's a brass pot.
[Guest]: I've forgotten what it's called in Sindhi, but that's very precious.
[Guest]: It came from Sindh.
[Guest]: I have one bowl, which I remember eating from.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I don't know how my mom kept it.
[Guest]: It was in my grandparents' place.
[Guest]: Our food was eaten on plates and this bowl, like a wide katori in which you had your,
[Guest]: not like a katori, but a broad one made of bell metal.
[Guest]: So I guess my mom just kept it because she was like me, somebody who believed in museums.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think that's about it.
[Guest]: Maybe one or two other little things like there's this fan she was given when she got
[Guest]: married, which was a tradition.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll leave it to listeners to discover, you know, all your books.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the most fascinating parts of the first book when I was reading about
[Amit Varma]: the history was also the whole saga around Pir Pagaro, right, all those kind of decades
[Amit Varma]: he had such a massive following, then the boy in the box controversy, then the minor
[Amit Varma]: role that people in your family had in the legal battles that he fought.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just fascinating and that would make for really the, you know, the most juicy episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the OTT, which you will hopefully soon be a consultant for, fingers crossed.
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of go back to your sort of personal journey of writing these books.
[Amit Varma]: So you've spoken to your mother, you've gotten these stories.
[Amit Varma]: At first, I guess you thought you'll just write her story down.
[Guest]: Yes, it was going to be her story for our family, then I realized that's there's too
[Guest]: much to tell.
[Guest]: I was extremely lucky to, you know, just completely by coincidence, keep meeting people who provided
[Guest]: a completely different representative experience, and that's what made that Stories from a Vanished
[Guest]: Homeland a kind of complete book, because there were so many different voices with different
[Guest]: stories.
[Guest]: I was also very lucky to be introduced to Nandita Bhavnani, who's a scholar, and she
[Guest]: had a huge collection of books on Sindh.
[Guest]: So I didn't have to go looking anywhere.
[Guest]: She just gave me everything I wanted and I could read stuff from her library, which I
[Guest]: was really lucky.
[Guest]: That was the most important part of this journey, that I had access to those books.
[Guest]: Otherwise, where would one get them, you know?
[Guest]: It has to be, you don't get them, we don't have a department or departments of South
[Guest]: Asian Studies, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we don't have Department of Sindh Studies anywhere in this country.
[Guest]: And then after that, I had some again, extremely lucky breaks.
[Guest]: Somebody read my book in Chile, Santiago, yeah, Sindhi family, a young man who had recently
[Guest]: become interested in, he was in his 30s at that time, 32 I think, or maybe slightly older.
[Guest]: And he read, he got the book on Amazon, he found it on Amazon.
[Guest]: And then he wrote in to my publisher's ID, saying that, where can I get more copies of
[Guest]: this lovely book?
[Guest]: Because if you're a Sindhi, and hi Sanjay, in case you're listening to this, hope you
[Guest]: don't mind my saying it.
[Guest]: He didn't want to pay the Amazon price and obviously would prefer to get it direct from
[Guest]: the publisher.
[Guest]: So yeah, we made touch and we got along extremely well.
[Guest]: And he came to Pune because he had family there and we met and I met him and his cousins
[Guest]: and they were young and so vibrant, so articulate, all of them so highly educated.
[Guest]: Is that how you think of a Sindhi person?
[Guest]: They are absolutely typical of the diaspora.
[Amit Varma]: They would actually be likely to fit the description because they do tend to already be the wealthiest,
[Amit Varma]: like I think one of your guests pointed out, Sindhis are everywhere first, like if an Indian
[Amit Varma]: has landed up somewhere, you can bet it's a Sindhi.
[Guest]: So which is also a stereotype, but they are.
[Guest]: They were there in the pots and then from the pots, they went inland.
[Guest]: So he then, they said we want to do a family history and I thought that they being who
[Guest]: they are, they will write pieces and I'll mentor them to structure and do a book.
[Guest]: But at some point they commissioned me, Sanjay commissioned me to write the book.
[Guest]: And so that was a huge thing for me.
[Guest]: It was one of the big steps in the journey because it exposed me to the diaspora.
[Guest]: I read everything I could about the diaspora, plus I traveled within the diaspora and I
[Guest]: met people.
[Guest]: And when I went to Chile to interview him, his dad and his dad's sister who was visiting
[Guest]: and another sister who lived also lived in Chile, they were so amazing.
[Guest]: They took me to two other places in Chile where there were other clusters of Sindhis
[Guest]: to get a sense of what life is like in the diaspora so far from, I mean Sindh of course,
[Guest]: but from Pune where many of them have homes.
[Guest]: And yeah, I could interview like in Punta Arenas, which is not too far from the South
[Guest]: Pole.
[Guest]: I interviewed this gentleman whose dad had first come to Sindh, to Punta Arenas in 1907.
[Guest]: So you know, that historical link.
[Guest]: So that was another big step in this where I, you know, then after that I did a module
[Guest]: for Sahapedia on the Sindharkis based on what I'd learned while writing this family story.
[Guest]: The other big thing that happened during this, because they also took me to Haridwar where
[Guest]: we sat with their family priest and I, you know, went through all the records and came
[Guest]: so I could do the family tree dating back to the early 19th century.
[Guest]: And then came the Amil book, which was also, it was a commission from the Khudabadi Amil
[Guest]: Panchayat of Bombay.
[Guest]: And that was also suggested to them by Nandita Bhavnani.
[Guest]: I mean, she told them, why don't you ask her, she'll do it.
[Guest]: And that was the next step.
[Guest]: It was a lot of work, because I interviewed a lot of people for that book, a huge number
[Guest]: of people.
[Guest]: I don't even know how many, but I know there were at least 150, there might have been more.
[Guest]: So solid interviews, like two, three hours and getting to the bottom of that person's
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: And after that, yeah, then after that, I've been invited to speak at conferences.
[Guest]: And yeah, of course, the culmination of the whole thing is Losing Home, which is that
[Guest]: I've just done, and it is right in the process of being released.
[Amit Varma]: And I've been fortunate enough to get an early physical copy, and it's quite beautiful and
[Amit Varma]: I'll recommend it to everyone.
[Amit Varma]: Question that comes to mind from what you mentioned about your friend Sanjay from Chile,
[Amit Varma]: is it the case that the diaspora, diaspora Sindhis, actually, when they care about their
[Amit Varma]: Sindhis work harder to hold on to it, because it's in greater risk, like if you're a Sindhi
[Amit Varma]: in India, you know, aspects of your Sindhis will kind of be around in the food, and you'll
[Guest]: hear your parents speak.
[Amit Varma]: And you won't feel that urgency that this is vanishing, I have to protect it.
[Amit Varma]: But with the diaspora, will there, is there, do you sense a greater urgency?
[Guest]: Not with Sanjay, because he's an intellectual.
[Guest]: And with Sanjay, his parents spoke to each other in Sindhi, not that they didn't.
[Guest]: And they cook, they cook all kinds of food.
[Guest]: I mean, his dad grew up in Indonesia, and Indonesian food is his favorite.
[Guest]: So they cook Indonesian a lot.
[Guest]: But of course, Sindhi food is a staple in their home, because his mom grew up in Pune.
[Guest]: And they are very much a Sindhi speaking family, although they are so international in every
[Guest]: way, because they can live anywhere, they have family everywhere, you know.
[Guest]: So that is something really, really, I consider myself extremely fortunate to know them.
[Guest]: And have been part of putting their family story together.
[Guest]: But there are places where you find this, not in their family, but you do find some
[Guest]: clusters where rituals are important.
[Guest]: And those rituals may not exactly be rituals that came from Sindh, because Ganpati immersion
[Guest]: is a big thing now in the diaspora.
[Guest]: And I recently learned that in Karachi, there was Ganpati immersion, but that was done by
[Guest]: the Maharashtrians of Karachi, not by the Sindhis.
[Guest]: You know, they did have it.
[Guest]: But it wasn't part of the Hindu Sindhi culture.
[Guest]: Hindu Sindhis got it from Bombay, Pune, wherever they lived and, you know, they became a part
[Guest]: of those societies.
[Guest]: And Ganpati is very big among Sindhis now, but it wasn't in Sindh.
[Guest]: I mean, definitely you still see the pictures of Ganeshji in Hindu places of worship in
[Guest]: Sindh.
[Guest]: Not that it wasn't there, but not the way it is, you know, where we have a festival.
[Guest]: Festival has grown all over India also.
[Guest]: I think I heard that they have these processions even in Chennai now.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think so.
[Guest]: I don't think I'm mistaken about that.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's true.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, which kind of indicates what I feel about them.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about also then, you know, you've been writing all these books, tell me also
[Amit Varma]: how and when and why you decided to get into publishing and being a publisher yourself?
[Guest]: Oh, that's such an easy answer.
[Guest]: It's because when my mom was telling me her story, she said that and then so, you know,
[Guest]: they were on the ship and that was their first bit of culture shock where they saw these
[Guest]: puris which were, oh my God, why are these puris so small, you know, everything is different.
[Guest]: So then they were in the ship, everybody's anxious, nobody knows what's going to happen.
[Guest]: Then they arrive in Bombay after two days, two nights on the ship and they can see Bombay,
[Guest]: but they can't get off because the ship is not allowed to dock and they're told that
[Guest]: you have to stay, spend another night and then one more night and they don't know what's
[Guest]: going to happen to them because are they going to send us back?
[Guest]: Are they going to send us somewhere else?
[Guest]: You know, what is going to happen to us?
[Guest]: Anyway, they arrived on Bombay and she says to me, it was the 14th of November and I was
[Guest]: like, oh my God, and I think we were probably in July at that point.
[Guest]: I said, let's do this and we'll have a big bash on the 14th of November and we will invite
[Guest]: all these cousins who were so close to her, who I don't even know, I've never met.
[Guest]: Some of their names are familiar, but I never met them.
[Guest]: And that's how it happened that I put that book out, but I also sent it to OUPP in Karachi
[Guest]: and they accepted it for publication.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was again, you know, like from this thing of being a ghostwriter, what do
[Guest]: you expect from a ghostwriter?
[Guest]: I mean, obviously she has to publish her own books, you know.
[Guest]: So I did, and it came, it worked out fine because once Oxford University Press publishes
[Guest]: your book, the libraries around the world accept it.
[Guest]: So that book is in Princeton and Harvard and SOAS and Oxford and Cambridge and blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: Wherever there is a Department of South Asian Studies, they had access to the book and some
[Guest]: of them must have got it.
[Guest]: The places I mentioned I know have it because I get messages on and off from people who
[Guest]: are doing their PhD or whatever.
[Guest]: Then Amil book is also there, Tapestry is also there in some of the universities.
[Guest]: And so Black and White Fountain, which is the name of my publishing concern, is also
[Guest]: in the library system.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I guess the books spoke for themselves.
[Guest]: And I have a problem, actually.
[Guest]: It's a very big problem.
[Guest]: I know how to bring out really lovely books.
[Guest]: They look nice.
[Guest]: And I became very, very, you know, right from the first book, I was making the pages myself.
[Guest]: I was very, very happy that I could decide where the picture goes and how big the caption
[Guest]: is and which lines should go next to which lines, you know, that's really important to
[Guest]: me.
[Amit Varma]: And I still do my pages myself.
[Guest]: What was the problem you mentioned?
[Guest]: The problems that I don't know how to sell.
[Guest]: So I can't sell and I can't do everything, obviously, I mean, you know, and now I mean,
[Guest]: there was a time when I could do quite a lot.
[Guest]: But now I'm not bothered.
[Guest]: I couldn't be bothered.
[Guest]: I think somebody else should sell the books.
[Guest]: And I don't know how because books are not being read that much.
[Guest]: And so now I feel I won't do any more books.
[Guest]: I'll just like blog and Instagram and, you know, just put out stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And that's good enough.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And for the listeners, I'll inform you that Saaz gifted me three of these books just now.
[Amit Varma]: And they're pretty immaculate.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I bought earlier ones on Kindle, but these are pretty immaculate.
[Amit Varma]: So if there is someone, if any listener feels that, you know, she can help Saaz get in touch
[Guest]: with her, you know, take it over.
[Guest]: So those three books which I gave you were the books that I've published by other people
[Guest]: and which are to do with partition, the Sindhi experience of partition, not by me.
[Guest]: So that's something that I did.
[Guest]: And Losing Home, which is by me, is the 10th book in that series.
[Guest]: I got this idea that I'll do something for children.
[Guest]: And when I started implementing the idea, I knew the first thing I need is good quality
[Guest]: illustrations.
[Guest]: And I found somebody completely by chance.
[Guest]: The first person who was recommended to me turned out to be perfect for the job.
[Guest]: And you know, I just sent him, I got his number and I sent him a WhatsApp message.
[Guest]: And I just said, I started working on this book, which is about the Sindhi experience
[Guest]: of partition.
[Guest]: And I'm looking for somebody who will do illustrations which are historically authentic and who is
[Guest]: good at drawing faces, because I want everybody who's in the book, all the people to be seen
[Guest]: and recognized, whether they are from family photos or whether they are political personalities.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, he immediately responded with so much enthusiasm.
[Guest]: And then we actually got started with the illustrations before I started writing.
[Guest]: And we had like four or five fabulous illustrations out before I started writing.
[Guest]: They were so detailed.
[Guest]: And I just couldn't believe it.
[Guest]: And I still feel how lucky I am.
[Guest]: His name is Shubhadeep Mukherjee.
[Guest]: And he is from Shantiniketan.
[Guest]: And then he has his master's from Baroda.
[Guest]: And then he worked, he works in Bombay.
[Guest]: And he's worked in senior levels in the corporate world in advertising and in films.
[Guest]: And now he's kind of doing whatever he wants to do.
[Guest]: And I'm so lucky that he's doing this book with me because, I mean, I was giving him
[Guest]: a full brief and then I'd change my mind or I think of something new.
[Guest]: And even though the book, the illustrations are so complex and, you know, with so much
[Guest]: detail, he just never has a problem in changing them, which I think is amazing.
[Guest]: I just think that, you know, we spoke earlier about my journey and how I started writing
[Guest]: about sin.
[Guest]: Then I think this is finding Shubhadeep has been really a very important part of it because
[Guest]: we've come to this book, which what I wanted to do with this book, when I say children,
[Guest]: I don't really mean little kids because I don't, I realize that I can't write for little
[Guest]: kids.
[Guest]: I'm talking about anyone who can understand, I mean, you know, the Harry Potter generation,
[Guest]: people like nine years, 10 years old, that's fine.
[Guest]: And this book has all the messages that I want to pass on, you know, all the messages
[Guest]: that I want to pass on to the future generations.
[Guest]: And it's a collection of stories, partly family stories and historical, the spectrum of the
[Guest]: Sindhi experience.
[Guest]: And that's what the book is about.
[Guest]: And finding, I mean, the title wasn't that easy, but we came up with Losing Home, Finding
[Guest]: Home, which seems to work.
[Guest]: And so Shubhadeep and I met once, just once we met in Bombay.
[Guest]: And we, he said to me, you know, what, anyone who does a book like this will want to send
[Guest]: a spread.
[Guest]: So I was like, oh, what do I do?
[Guest]: Should I put a map or what?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, should I?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: So then suddenly, I remember this photo, which is from 1916.
[Guest]: It's a visit that Gandhi made to Sindh.
[Guest]: And he's sitting in the middle of a crowd.
[Guest]: And there are lots of people, next to him are the most important people.
[Guest]: But there are all kinds of people and the women and children are sitting in front.
[Guest]: And those women and children, obviously, the families of the very important people sitting
[Guest]: next to Gandhi.
[Guest]: But everybody's there.
[Guest]: So I decided, let's put that in the center.
[Guest]: And there was so much symbolism to it, because, you know, you have Gandhi in the center.
[Guest]: And then I said, okay, I told Shubh, let's have Gandhi right in the center, so that he
[Guest]: is actually there are, you know, Gandhi's on both pages, there's a partition metaphor
[Guest]: there as well.
[Guest]: And of course, Gandhi is on both sides.
[Guest]: So that was what we have.
[Guest]: And I'm very, very excited about this book, because it's it carries it's there's so much
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: It's only 112 pages of which I think about 40% is pictures, Shubh's illustrations, of
[Guest]: course, but we also have some archival photos, which shows how people are very old photos.
[Guest]: I mean, they're so old that nobody knows exactly who these people are.
[Guest]: And fortunately, we don't know the names of most of the people in them.
[Guest]: But you can see how they're dressed, you can see their caps and their footwear and you
[Guest]: know, what they're wearing and how they're seated and all that, which I think tells you
[Guest]: a lot about if you're, you know, if you're interested in history, or if you're interested
[Guest]: in your own family, if you're a Sindhi, so what where you came from.
[Guest]: And also, you know, there's so many stories which are related, like from the illustrations,
[Guest]: like we were just saying, I couldn't put everything into the book.
[Guest]: So I have the illustrations to keep talking about various other things that I also want
[Guest]: to say.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I have to say that while the book isn't out yet, you've been kind enough to,
[Unknown]: you know, give me a proof copy.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the center spread.
[Amit Varma]: There's even a young LK Advani in there, along with various other Sindhis and Gandhi split
[Amit Varma]: in the middle, almost like Tobatek Singh, as it were, Tobatek Gandhi.
[Guest]: Yeah, so we're still struggling with that.
[Guest]: But I hope to have it printed and ready very soon.
[Guest]: And it's actually already showing for pre order on Amazon, I just have to get my act
[Guest]: together and make sure that it's out before.
[Guest]: And yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, I have a title for season one, episode one, I mean, I don't know what
[Amit Varma]: the show will be called, but I have a title for season one, episode one.
[Guest]: It was the 14th of November.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: I don't know how we're going to work with that, because it's Chacha Nehru's birthday.
[Amit Varma]: Is that why they made the ship eight?
[Amit Varma]: Because they wanted it to land on his birthday?
[Guest]: I couldn't put anything past them.
[Guest]: But it works well for Losing Home because it's a children's book.
[Guest]: So you know, we thought of launching that also around Children's Day.
[Guest]: I mean, it will be out way before that, but we are planning to do this launch in Delhi
[Guest]: at the India International Center.
[Guest]: And Aanchal Malhotra is going to be there.
[Guest]: So we're going to be talking about various things.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely, Aanchal is great.
[Guest]: I had an episode with her.
[Guest]: She is just amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really lucky that she's agreed to do this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing people keeping the past alive, which which I feel is so important, I may not have
[Amit Varma]: felt that 25 years ago, but it just feels so important in moderating and tempering and
[Amit Varma]: informing the present moment.
[Amit Varma]: So final bunch of questions.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that, you know, while you are a oral historian, you know, you mentioned these
[Amit Varma]: long interviews, which last three, four hours to three hours, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And just as an audio person, I wish these audio files themselves were sort of archived
[Amit Varma]: somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And you can just hear their own voices.
[Guest]: And have you thought of that?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: In fact, 1947 Partition Archive asked me if I would give them one.
[Guest]: And I'm so happy because then they'll be accessible.
[Guest]: So there's some admin stuff we have to do.
[Guest]: A, we have to get I have to get their formats of permissions and stuff.
[Guest]: And B, I have to go through the process of because like I said, I don't know how many
[Guest]: there are.
[Guest]: I mean, they're just there.
[Guest]: That's huge cluster.
[Guest]: I need to just, you know, date them and put some keywords and the name, you know, the
[Guest]: year of the date, birth of date and birth of death of the person interviewed and all
[Guest]: that stuff.
[Guest]: I have to put it.
[Guest]: It's a big, big thing.
[Guest]: I mean, it'll take me a few weeks to do.
[Guest]: And once I'm probably going to do it, and hopefully it'll get done for the end of 2022.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: Can't wait.
[Amit Varma]: My penultimate question, if there are young Sindhis listening to this, who are thinking
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, we are young Sindhis, but we are not young Sindhi-Sindhis in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that connection isn't there and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And now they're curious and they want to find out more.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, they'll buy your books.
[Amit Varma]: But besides that, you know, what would you, what would you tell them?
[Guest]: Look for family stories is one thing and try and document them and, you know, keep them,
[Guest]: record them for the future.
[Guest]: That's one.
[Guest]: A second thing I'd say is just be a little careful of what you get on WhatsApp, because
[Guest]: some of it is not really accurate and it's misleading.
[Guest]: I'd recommend The Ove to Sindh, which I mentioned earlier, which is a collection of conversations
[Guest]: with experts, Aruna Madnani, and she's picked a lot of people who know stuff and it's really
[Guest]: well done.
[Guest]: There are some books, there's a lot of writing happening.
[Guest]: There's some, you know, there's some fiction, like you saw that with the one, one of the
[Guest]: books I gave you, which is called Beyond the Rainbow by Murali Milwani.
[Guest]: And Murali is a really good writer and what he's done is he, he calls this book A Gift
[Guest]: of My Travels, where he sees things and, you know, they stay in his mind and then he weaves
[Guest]: stories around them.
[Guest]: And they are based in the diaspora and they are so, so lifelike.
[Guest]: People from the diaspora, they recognize these characters and the situation.
[Guest]: So it's not just a collection of short stories, it's also a little business manual, you know,
[Guest]: which tells you how Sindhis sell and what they sell and what, how they shouldn't do
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And, you know, the kind of habits some people have, which they shouldn't have and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: What else?
[Guest]: I mean, I think there are, there are good books.
[Guest]: And there are now so many blogs and they're like, it's a huge, it's a growing number.
[Guest]: Every day I see some new Sindhi handle on Instagram, because whoever, whoever's interested
[Guest]: in spreading the word is using online methods.
[Guest]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question for you, which is sort of a traditional final question for all guests
[Amit Varma]: who pass through these lands of the seen and the unseen, which is, for me and my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: recommend books, music, films, which mean a lot to you, so they don't have to do anything
[Amit Varma]: to do with, they don't have to have anything to do with Sindh.
[Amit Varma]: But just books you love, films you love, music you love.
[Guest]: Okay, now I'm not at all, I mean, this has not been on my mind.
[Guest]: So let me think the books that I love the most.
[Guest]: I, when I was young, I used to read a lot of Kurt Vonnegut.
[Guest]: I feel I just loved his work.
[Guest]: It was, you know, every word would make me happy.
[Guest]: Every sentence would make me happy, not every word.
[Guest]: And who else can I say?
[Guest]: I have, you know, back in the day when I was in college in my first, in the first years
[Guest]: of my working life, there were these secondhand bookstalls in Fountain.
[Guest]: I don't know, I don't think they're there anymore.
[Guest]: If they're there, those books are not there.
[Guest]: But whatever books they had, they were the books of the authors of that time.
[Guest]: And everyone I knew had read those books.
[Guest]: And, you know, there was Philip Roth.
[Guest]: And there was, I guess Thomas Hardy was there because it was a textbook series.
[Guest]: I'm not that much of a Hardy fan.
[Guest]: It's a little bit long winded and tedious.
[Guest]: But who else, Douglas Adams, Leslie Thomas.
[Guest]: Of course, P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse, even today, I love P.G. Woodhouse makes you laugh aloud.
[Guest]: And when it comes to how I'm not good with movies, I love watching, but I don't remember,
[Guest]: I don't retain.
[Guest]: I watch with like 50% attention and enjoy them a lot, entertaining, but I don't remember
[Guest]: the names and I don't remember the actors and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll put you on the spot, supposing that OTT is made, and there are two characters
[Amit Varma]: who are you, because different timelines, there's an 18 year old Saaz and there's a
[Amit Varma]: 55 year old Saaz.
[Amit Varma]: You know, who would you like to play you?
[Guest]: 18 years old, you see, I'm not very good with actors, but I can describe the 18 year old
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: Ah, God, that's so hard.
[Guest]: Give me some actors names.
[Guest]: And you know, I think I know somebody who I'd love to play me and that's Amrita Rao,
[Guest]: who I really like her a lot.
[Guest]: She's a lovely person.
[Guest]: She just happens to be my cousin's daughter.
[Guest]: But in terms of personality, different from me because I was completely wacky when I was
[Guest]: 18.
[Guest]: And she's such a lovely, stable person.
[Guest]: She's extremely nice.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's go with Amrita, if she'll agree.
[Guest]: And what about the one who, the older one?
[Guest]: I'll do that myself.
[Guest]: Yeah, who could do it better than me?
[Amit Varma]: So Saaz, thank you so much for your time today.
[Guest]: This has been great.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: I really enjoyed listening to your questions and trying to answer them.
[Guest]: I don't even know what I said, because you make the environment so comfortable and so
[Guest]: relaxed that I was just talking without thinking and I hope I didn't make a fool of myself.
[Amit Varma]: This was fantastic, though I don't know what your daughter Veda will think about all the
[Amit Varma]: mentions of her, but this was great.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, enter rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will.
[Amit Varma]: Saaz doesn't seem too active on social media, which is why she's so incredibly productive.
[Amit Varma]: But you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.